

=== PAGE 201 ===
government and the significant volume of debt securities issued by the
government.
Because U.S. Treasury bonds enjoy the full-faith-and-credit backing of
the U.S. government, bondholders face no risk of default. Holders of
government debt sleep secure in the knowledge that interest and principal
payments will be made in full and in a timely manner. Lack of default risk
does not, however, liberate bondholders from exposure to price fluctuations.
When interest rates rise, bond prices fall, as purchasers of existing assets
need an adjustment to reflect the now-higher rates available on newly
issued debt. When interest rates fall, bonds prices rise, as sellers of existing
assets require greater compensation for their now-more-attractive fixed
stream of future payments. Of all risky investments, investors expect the
lowest returns from U.S. Treasury bonds, due to the high degree of security
intrinsic in obligations of the U.S. government.
Interest Rate Risk
Bonds confuse investors. The inverse relationship between interest rates
and bond prices (rates up, prices down and vice versa) proves central to
understanding the role of fixed income in an investment portfolio. Yet
surveys show that a large majority of investors fail to grasp even the most
basic elements of bond math. Even highly respected market observers
sometimes get it wrong. An article in the New York Times business section
ironically entitled “Better Understanding of Bonds” asserted that “duration
and bond prices move in lockstep with interest rates. A bond with a
duration of seven years would gain 7 percent of its price when interest rates
moved up one percentage point. The same bond would lose 7 percent when
rates moved down that amount.”14 Of course, the Times described the
relationship between prices and yields in perfectly perverse prose. Increases
in interest rates cause price declines, not price increases. If a highly
regarded, financially sophisticated New York Times business reporter cannot
get it right, what chance does an ordinary investor have?
Duration measures the effective maturity of a bond, considering the
timing and present value of individual cash flows received over the term of
the instrument.* Longer duration bonds exhibit greater sensitivity to interest


=== PAGE 202 ===
rate changes than do shorter duration bonds. By increasing a portfolio’s
duration, investors gain greater exposure to interest rate moves, creating a
roughly equivalent choice between more assets with lower duration and
fewer assets with higher duration. Portfolio managers wishing to reduce the
opportunity costs of holding fixed income assets might rely on a small
allocation to a long duration portfolio, in essence buying the diversifying
power of bonds on the cheap.
In the realm of U.S. Treasury bond investing, risk relates primarily to
time horizon. An investor with a six-month time horizon finds six-month
Treasury bills riskless, as no doubt exists about the timely payment of the
face value of the bill at maturity. That same six-month-time-horizon
investor finds ten-year Treasury notes quite risky. As interest rates change,
the value of the note might vary materially, even over a six-month holding
period. An increase in rates leaves the investor with a loss, while a decline
in rates provides the investor with an unexpected windfall.
Similarly, an investor with a ten-year time horizon faces significant risk
with six-month Treasury bill investments. The six-month bills must be
rolled over nineteen times to generate a ten-year holding period return. At
the outset, the investor knows the rate only on the first six-month bill. The
nineteen future rollover rates hold considerable uncertainty. Unless
investors match holding period with maturity, price changes or rate changes
may cause returns to diverge from expected levels.
Diversifying Power
U.S. Treasury securities provide a unique form of diversification for
investor portfolios, protecting against financial crisis and economic distress.
In the stock market collapse of October 1987, when the U.S. stock market
plummeted more than 20 percent in a single day, investors sought the safe
haven of U.S. Treasury obligations. Even as stock prices fell off of a cliff,
Treasury bonds staged an impressive rally. During the economic distress
surrounding the confluence of the 1998 Asian, Russian, and American
capital markets crises, investors engaged in a “flight to quality,” favoring
the security of U.S. Treasury obligations. Similarly, amid the credit crunch
of August 2007, Treasury bill yields dropped two full percentage points in a
matter of days to an intraday low of 2.5 percent. At that time, the spread


=== PAGE 203 ===
between LIBOR and Treasury bills amounted to a stunning three percentage
points, fully four times the average spread that prevailed for the month of
June 2007. In times of crisis, government securities provide the greatest
degree of protection to investor portfolios.
The protection to portfolio values provided by government bonds comes
at a high price. Expected returns for fixed income instruments fall short of
expected returns for equity-oriented investments. Some investors attempt to
mitigate the opportunity costs of owning government bonds by holding
higher-yielding corporate paper. Unfortunately, nongovernment bonds
exhibit characteristics such as credit risk, illiquidity, and optionality that
reduce effectiveness as a hedge against financial distress. The purity of
noncallable, long-term, default-free Treasury bonds provides the most
powerful diversification to investor portfolios.
Panic of 1998
In the summer and early fall of 1998, the Asian financial crisis painted a
bleak backdrop for securities markets. A mid-July slump in equity markets
accelerated in August when devaluation and default in Russia contributed to
investor anxiety. The near collapse in September of the insanely levered
Long-Term Capital Management hedge fund fueled bearish sentiment,
causing market participants to demand immediate liquidity and safety.
During the worldwide collapse in equity prices, as shown in Figure 7.1,
the broad-based Wilshire 5000 declined 22 percent from its all time peak on
July 17th to the market bottom on October 8th. Reflecting a strong
preference for quality and size, large-capitalization stocks outperformed
small securities in dramatic fashion with the S&P 500 outpacing the Russell
2000 by a margin of 14 percent, or -19 percent to -33 percent. Developed
foreign and emerging equity returns provided little solace for diversified
portfolios, with the markets falling 21 percent and 27 percent, respectively.
Amid the market tumult, long-term Treasuries posted solid gains,
returning 8 percent and besting the results of every major asset class. Credit
risk and optionality dampened the performance of high quality corporate
bonds and mortgages, limiting returns to 5 percent and 2 percent,
respectively. Junk bonds and emerging debt produced losses, reflecting the
high degree of equity exposure implicit in risky bond positions. High yield


=== PAGE 204 ===
posted a -7 percent return and emerging markets generated a dismal -24
percent result over the period.
Asset class performance surrounding the 1998 market panic illustrates
the superior diversifying power of pure fixed income—long-term,
noncallable, default-free. Under normal circumstances, credit exposure and
option risk increase returns; in times of crisis, U.S. Treasury bonds provide
the protection that investors require.
Figure 7.1 Treasury Bonds Protect Portfolios in Turbulent Markets
Various Asset Class Returns, July 17, 1998 to October 8, 1998
Bond Prices and Inflation
To add a further measure of complexity to the world of bond investing,
investors in traditional U.S. Treasury bonds observe only nominal returns.
In some instances, investors care primarily about nominal returns. For
example, if a debtor desires to pay off a fixed obligation, the debtor requires
only the amount of the debt, nothing more and nothing less. Nominally
denominated investments, like Treasury bonds, match nominal liabilities


=== PAGE 205 ===
nicely. If, on the other hand, an institution hopes to maintain the purchasing
power of endowment assets, that institution needs to keep pace with
inflation. Inflation-sensitive investments, unlike Treasury bonds, fulfill
inflation-sensitive requirements. For holders of traditional Treasury debt
securities, changes in inflation rates influence after-inflation returns in
unpredictable ways, leading to potential variation between anticipated and
actual outcomes.
Investors price fixed income instruments to generate positive inflation-
adjusted rates of return. When the inflation rates experienced by investors
more or less match the expectations formed at the beginning of the holding
period, bondholders receive the anticipated after-inflation return. When
inflation rates exceed expectations, the unanticipated inflation erodes the
purchasing power of the promised stream of fixed payments, causing
investors to receive disappointing after-inflation returns. When inflation
rates fall short of expectations, the lower rate of general price inflation
provides investors with a purchasing power boost. Deviations between
original inflationary expectations and actual experience contain the
potential to cause dramatic changes in real returns for fixed income
investors.
When inflationary expectations fail to match actual experience, bonds
tend to behave differently from other financial assets. Unanticipated
inflation crushes bonds, while ultimately benefiting equities. Unanticipated
deflation boosts bonds, while undermining stocks. Bonds provide the
greatest diversification relative to equities in cases where actual inflation
differs dramatically from expected levels.
Alignment of Interests
Interests of Treasury bond investors and the U.S. government prove to be
better aligned than interests of corporate bond investors and corporate
issuers. The government sees little reason to disfavor bondholders. In
essence, action taken to reduce the value of government bonds represents a
transfer from bondholders to non-bondholders. In fact, if all debt were held
domestically, advantages or disadvantages accruing to the government from
changes in bond values would balance equal-and-offsetting disadvantages
or advantages accruing to bondholders, leading to transfers from one group


=== PAGE 206 ===
of citizens (taxpayers or bondholders) to another group of citizens
(bondholders or taxpayers). Moreover, were the government to
disadvantage bond investors, future access to credit markets might be
impaired. Worry over misalignment of interests causes little lost sleep for
owners of Treasury bonds.
Investors in Treasury bonds generally perceive the government as a
neutral player in the debt management process. Unlike corporate
debtholders, who sit squarely across the table from the issuers of corporate
obligations, government bondholders expect fair treatment. Consider the
fact that from 1975 to 1984, the U.S. Treasury offered a dozen issues of
thirty-year bonds that contained call provisions for the final five years of
the issue’s life. A call provision allows the debt issuer to redeem a debt
issue at a fixed price. Economically motivated issuers exercise call
provisions only when the fixed-call price stands below the value of the
bond calculated in absence of a call provision. Exercise of a call provision
eliminates debt with high coupons relative to current market levels,
benefiting the issuer and hurting the investor.
Because of the special nature of the government’s role in debt markets,
bond market participants debated whether the government would employ
the call option for debt management purposes or for economic refundings.
If the government used the call option for debt management, then
bondholders faced an idiosyncratic risk as likely to provide a benefit as a
cost. If the government used the call option for economic refundings, then
bondholders faced a risk of economic loss.
Government bondholders received the answer to the question of how
the Treasury would behave on January 14, 2000 when the Treasury
“announced the call for redemption at par on May 15, 2000 of the 8-1/4%
Treasury Bonds of 2000–05.”15 The government responded to economic
incentives, calling high-interest debt to reduce financing charges.
In later refundings, the U.S. Treasury explicitly cited an economic
motivation for calling bonds. In the unimaginatively titled January 15, 2004
Public Debt News release, “Treasury Calls 9-1/8 Percent Bonds of 2004–
09,” the government noted that “these bonds are being called to reduce the
cost of debt financing. The 9-1/8 percent interest rate is significantly above
the current cost of securing financing for the five years remaining to their


=== PAGE 207 ===
maturity. In current market conditions, Treasury estimates that interest
savings from the call and refinancing will be about $544 million.”16 In
other words, the ability to refinance the 9-percent-plus-coupon bonds at an
interest cost of between 3 percent and 4 percent resulted in substantial
interest savings for the government.
Even though the government acted in an economic fashion by
exercising the call provision on the 9-1/8s Treasury bonds of 2004–09, the
fact that investors debated whether the government would exercise the call
provision to generate interest savings signifies the unusual relationship
between the government and its creditors. In fact, the program of callable
Treasury issuance lasted a mere ten years and involved a relatively small
portion of overall government bond issuance. Moreover, the call provisions
affected only the last five years of the thirty-year bond’s life, in contrast to
the much more aggressive call provisions typically included in issues of
long-term corporate debt. Perhaps the U.S. Treasury stopped selling callable
bonds to improve the character of securities offered to government bond
market participants. In any event, of all debt issuers, the government
promotes the greatest alignment of interests with its creditors.
At December 31, 2006, roughly 31 percent of U.S. government bond
issues represented debt issued by government-sponsored enterprises
(GSEs). (The Government National Mortgage Association, known as
“Ginnie Mae,” the Federal Home Loan and Mortgage Corporation, known
as “Freddie Mac,” and the Federal National Mortgage Association, known
as “Fannie Mae,” constitute the largest GSEs.) Many market participants
treat debt issued by GSEs as close substitutes for U.S. Treasury obligations.
In fact, credit quality of GSEs ranges from the full-faith-and-credit status
enjoyed by Ginnie Mae to the less exalted status of Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac. Many GSEs operate in a nether land between the certainty of
government guarantees and the uncertainty of corporate promises to pay.
While chances of default by GSEs seem quite low to most market
observers, many GSE obligations contain options that may disadvantage
bondholders.
Investors seeking the purity of U.S. Treasury debt face a surprisingly
daunting task. Many high quality bond investment vehicles hold large
quantities of GSE debt, as fund managers pursue the time-honored


=== PAGE 208 ===
investment practice of hoping to get something for nothing in the form of
incremental yield on GSE paper (the something) without exposing the
portfolio to additional risk (the nothing). The twin possibilities of credit
deterioration and exercise of options by the GSEs carry the potential to
harm bondholder interests. Investors seeking high quality fixed income
exposure avoid GSE debt and opt for the purity of U.S. Treasury bonds, the
full-faith-and-credit obligations of the U.S. government.
Cash
Investors frequently divide fixed income assets into cash and bonds, with
the former consisting of instruments maturing within one year, and the latter
including instruments with more than a year to maturity. For investors with
short investment horizons, cash represents the riskless asset as market
participants know nominal and real returns with reasonable certainty.
Certainty of return comes with a high price as returns over the eighty-one
years through December 31, 2006 amount to a mere 3.7 percent per annum
for cash, which falls to a paltry 0.7 percent per year after adjustment for
inflation.
Because investors frequently employ one-year horizons when
conducting portfolio analysis, cash naturally enters the matrix of capital
markets returns, causing many long-term investors to misidentify cash
holdings as a riskless asset. If investors conducted analysis over periods
consistent with an appropriate investment horizon, cash would appear as a
substantially riskier asset.
Some investors argue that cash provides necessary liquidity for
endowment funds, ignoring the massive amounts of liquidity resident in
institutional portfolios. Interest income, dividend payments, and rental
streams provide liquid cash flows, facilitating the ability of the investment
fund to meet spending distribution requirements. Natural turnover of assets
provides another source of funds. Bonds mature, companies merge, and
private assets become liquid, serving as sources of cash flow. Manager sell
decisions create yet another set of liquidity events. Finally, if income flows,
natural asset turnover and manager sales create insufficient liquidity to meet
spending requirements, investors retain the ability to direct sales of assets to
provide for current consumption. The modest transactions costs incurred in


=== PAGE 209 ===
selling assets pale in comparison to the drag on returns created by holding
cash as a standard part of an institutional portfolio. Based on delivery of
poor real returns and failure to serve as a riskless asset for long-term
investors, cash plays no significant role in a well-constructed endowment
portfolio.
Market Characteristics
At December 31, 2006, U.S. government bonds totaled $3.2 trillion, of
which $2.2 trillion represented full-faith-and-credit obligations of the U.S.
Treasury and $1.0 trillion represented debt of government sponsored
enterprises. U.S. Treasury bonds trade in the deepest, most efficient market
in the world.
The universe of Treasury bonds sported a yield to maturity* of 4.9
percent at year-end 2006 with an average maturity of 6.9 years and a
duration of 5.0 years. Agency issues promised a yield of 5.1 percent with a
5.1-year average maturity and 3.5-year duration.
Summary
U.S. Treasury bonds provide a unique form of portfolio diversification,
serving as a hedge against financial accidents and unanticipated deflation.
No other asset type comes close to matching the diversifying power created
by long-term, noncallable, default-free, full-faith-and-credit obligations of
the U.S. government.
Investors pay a price for the diversifying power of Treasury bonds. The
ironclad security of Treasury debt causes investors to expect (and deserve)
low returns relative to those expected from riskier assets. While holders of
long-term Treasury bonds stand to benefit from declining price inflation, in
an environment of unanticipated inflation Treasury bondholders lose.
Treasury bonds’ modest expected returns and adverse reaction to inflation
argue for modest allocations to the asset class by long-term investors.
FOREIGN DEVELOPED EQUITY


=== PAGE 210 ===
Investments in developed economy equity markets provide the same
expected returns as U.S. equity investments. But overseas investments
exhibit two critical differentiating characteristics relative to domestic
holdings. First, markets in different regions respond to different economic
forces, causing returns to behave differently from one region of the world to
the next. Second, investment in non-U.S. markets exposes investors to
foreign currency fluctuations, adding another variable to the investment
equation.
Developed economy equity markets share similar levels of expected
return. Comparability in economic infrastructure, commonality in drivers of
economic performance, and secular liberalization in flows of labor, goods,
and services across national boundaries combine to cause investors to
expect similar long-run results from investments in developed equity
markets. Although investor enthusiasm for individual countries waxes and
wanes along with strong or weak recent market performance, over
reasonably long periods of time, investors might expect the developed
markets in North America, Europe, and Asia to produce roughly
comparable returns.
In fact, in the thirty-seven years since the 1970 inception of the Morgan
Stanley Capital International (MSCI) Europe, Australasia and Far East
(EAFE) Index that tracks non-U.S. equity market performance, EAFE
countries generated 10.8 percent per annum returns relative to 11.2 percent
per annum returns for the U.S. dominated S&P 500 Index. While the
domestic and international results fall in the same neighborhood, the United
States enjoys a slight margin of superiority. Because such market
performance comparisons exhibit a high degree of sensitivity to beginning
and ending dates, the most reasonable conclusion supports the assumption
of approximate equivalence between expected returns for domestic and
international equities.
Diversifying Power
The lack of correlation between foreign markets and the U.S. market
provides valuable diversification to investors. Some observers speculate
that the process of global economic integration has caused individual
country equity markets to behave increasingly one like the other, leading to


=== PAGE 211 ===
less prospective diversification. As evidence of increasing correlation
between markets, diversification skeptics point to the behavior of equity
markets in the crash of 1987 and in the financial dislocations during the
crisis of 1998. In both instances, stock markets worldwide exhibited similar,
extraordinary declines. Yet, market declines in 1987 and 1998 constituted
short-term events in which market players expressed extreme preferences
for liquidity and quality. After brief periods during which many developed
equity markets moved in concert, individual country markets reverted to
fluctuation in response to country-specific drivers of local market
performance.
Consider the relative returns of equity markets in the United States and
Japan. In the 1980s, Japan dominated all other world stock markets,
returning 28.4 percent per annum versus 16.5 percent per annum for other
non-U.S. markets and 17.4 percent per annum for the U.S. equity markets.
Near the end of the extraordinary bull run in Japanese stocks, Japan boasted
the largest market capitalization in the world, surpassing even the massive
U.S. market in size.
In the 1990s, Japan’s fortunes reversed. During the last decade of the
twentieth century, Japan’s economy collapsed, contributing to a market
decline of 0.9 percent per annum for the decade. In contrast, other non-U.S.
markets returned 13.5 percent per annum and the United States market
produced an astonishing 18.2 percent return per annum. As Japan’s stock
market declined, the country lost its dominant equity market position,
falling so far behind the United States that at one point Japan’s equity
market capitalization amounted to less than one-fifth of the U.S.’s market
capitalization. Clearly, investments in individual equity markets behave
differently, generating returns that differ one from the other, thereby
providing diversification to portfolio holdings.
Foreign Currency Exposure
Investors in foreign equities assume foreign exchange risk as an
unavoidable part of overseas equity exposure. Realistic investors expect
foreign currency translation neither to add to nor to subtract from
investment results. Even though much ink spills and many trees fall in the
service of market prognosticators who fill reams of pages in attempts to


=== PAGE 212 ===
divine the future of foreign exchange rates, no one really knows where
currencies will go. Sensible investors avoid speculating on currencies.
Some observers suggest that holders of foreign equities should routinely
hedge foreign exchange exposure. Unfortunately, hedges prove difficult to
fashion as foreign equity managers face uncertain holding periods and
unknowable future position sizes, creating issues regarding the appropriate
term and magnitude of the hedge. As a result, foreign equity investors
necessarily assume at least some foreign exchange risk along with
commitments to the asset class.
Fortunately, finance theorists conclude that some measure of foreign
exchange exposure adds to portfolio diversification. Unless foreign
currency positions constitute more than 20 percent or 25 percent of
portfolio assets, currency exposure serves to reduce overall portfolio risk.
Beyond 20 percent to 25 percent of portfolio assets, the currency exposure
constitutes a source of incremental risk, suggesting consideration of some
corrective action.
Performance Chasing
Investors tend to seek diversification when the core portfolio asset
disappoints, either in absolute or in relative terms. For instance, from 1998
to 2003, a period during which foreign markets underperformed, returning a
cumulative -18.5 percent relative to a cumulative -6.4 percent for the broad
U.S. market, college endowments maintained a relatively stable allocation
to non-U.S. equities. The fact that foreign stock allocations fell in a narrow
range of between 12.5 percent and 13.8 percent for the period indicates that
investors were engaged in rational rebalancing activity. In contrast to the
rational rebalancing in the face of poor relative performance, as foreign
markets took off in 2004, allocations to foreign equities took off, too. In the
three years from 2004 to 2006, non-U.S. equities posted returns of 23.9
percent per annum and emerging markets generated returns of 35.8 percent
per annum, completely dominating the U.S. market returns of 13.1 percent
per annum. In response, college endowment managers chased performance,
boosting foreign equity allocations from 13.8 percent in 2003 to 15.6
percent in 2004 to 17.4 percent in 2005 and finally to 20.1 percent in 2006.
Momentum strategies generally end badly.


=== PAGE 213 ===
Strong relative performance of foreign equities caused endowment
managers to dramatically increase non-U.S. equity holdings, with investors
frequently citing diversification as the rationale for boosting foreign
allocations. Disappointing performance from the diversifying asset may
cause investors to reduce allocations at an inopportune time. Sensible
investors pursue diversification as a policy to reduce risk, not as a tactic to
chase performance. By following a disciplined policy of maintaining a well-
diversified set of portfolio exposures, regardless of market zigs and zags,
investors establish the conditions for long-run success. In fact, when taking
market conditions into account, investors increase the odds of success by
diversifying into asset classes after they suffer poor performance. In any
case, foreign equities provide an important tool for reducing portfolio risk
without sacrificing expected returns.
Foreign Equity Prices and Inflation
Investors in domestic equities face an inflationary paradox—stocks appear
to provide good long-term protection against inflation, while they seem to
offer poor short-term protection. Foreign stock investors encounter no such
conundrum. The tenuous link between (a) domestic inflation and (b) the
returns of foreign stocks translated into dollars proves so remote as to
render foreign equities useless as a hedge against inflation.
Alignment of Interests
As a first approximation, alignment of interests between U.S. investors and
foreign corporations resembles the relationship between U.S. investors and
U.S. corporations. Generally speaking, both domestically and overseas,
equity investors expect corporate management to look after shareholder
interests.
Even though the corporate scandals at Enron and WorldCom, among
others, highlighted the shortcomings of American corporate governance, the
fact remains that in the United States a strong coincidence of interest exists
between shareholders and management. As a broad generalization,
elsewhere in the world corporate managements focus less single-mindedly
on profit generation. In some countries, cultural norms lead to greater


=== PAGE 214 ===
concern for the needs of other stakeholders, including workers, lenders, and
the broader community. In other countries, poor governance structures
allow controlling shareholders to divert resources from minority
shareholders. While a lesser coincidence of interests between overseas
managements and their shareholders constitutes a disadvantage to owners of
foreign shares, the advantages of increasing the investment opportunity set
argue for inclusion of non-U.S. securities in individual investor portfolios.
Market Characteristics
At December 31, 2006, developed foreign markets totaled $23.8 trillion, as
measured by Morgan Stanley Capital International. The sum of the twenty-
two countries included by MSCI in the non-U.S. developed world exceeded
the market capitalization of the U.S. market, which stood at $18.2 trillion as
of year-end 2006. Japan led the non-U.S. world with $5.0 trillion in assets.
Other large markets include the United Kingdom ($3.8 trillion), France
($2.4 trillion), Canada ($1.8 trillion), and Germany ($1.6 trillion). Europe
accounted for 63 percent of the non-U.S. world, Asia for 26 percent,
Canada for 7 percent and Australia/New Zealand for 5 percent.
Overall, foreign developed equity markets sported a dividend yield of
2.4 percent, a price-earnings ratio of 16.0, and a price-book ratio of 2.7.
Regional variations matter. Europe yielded 2.7 percent at year-end 2006
relative to 1.1 percent for Japan, while European securities posted a price-
earnings ratio of 14.5 and a price-book ratio of 2.6 relative to respective
ratios of 21.2 and 2.1 for Japan.
Summary
Since expected returns from foreign developed markets roughly
approximate expected returns from U.S. markets, investors establish
positions in foreign developed equity markets primarily to provide portfolio
diversification. The most important source of diversification stems from the
fact that forces driving returns in equity markets outside of the United
States differ from forces driving returns in the United States. Foreign
currency exposure adds a further measure of diversification to investor
portfolios.


=== PAGE 215 ===
Sensible investors invest in foreign equity markets through thick and
thin, regardless of recent past performance. All too often, market players
seek the diversification promised by foreign stocks following a period of
strong relative foreign market returns. When the diversifying strategies fail
to produce returns superior to domestic market results, investors abandon
the disappointing diversifying assets. Performance-chasing players use
international equities to whipsaw portfolios, locking in poor relative returns
and damaging investment results.
EMERGING MARKETS EQUITY
Emerging markets represent a high-risk, high-expected-return segment of
the marketable equities universe. Defined as a group of countries with
economies in an intermediate stage of development, neither undeveloped
nor developed, emerging markets present a formidable array of fundamental
risks for investors. On a macro level, investors concern themselves with the
development of the overall economy and the maturation of the securities
markets’ infrastructure. On a micro level, investors worry about quality of
management and profit orientation of nascent enterprises.
Market observers frequently confuse strong economic growth with
strong equity market prospects. Consider the extreme case of a command
economy with resource allocation rules that operate without the benefit of
securities markets. Clearly, economic growth occurs without any impact on
stock prices, as equity securities do not exist. In the less extreme case of
market-oriented economies with poor resource allocation, providers of
equity capital might receive consistently poor returns. Corporate revenues
may accrue disproportionately to corporate management (through salaries),
to labor (through wages), or to government entities (through taxes), leaving
inadequate recompense for capital. In well-functioning economies, prices
and returns adjust to reflect financial market conditions. Not all emerging
market economies function well. Profitable equity market investments
require profitable enterprises, for investors ultimately share in corporate
earnings. Therein lies the primary microeconomic risk for emerging market
investors. In emerging markets, as elsewhere, economic growth may not


=== PAGE 216 ===
lead to corporate profitability, which in turn translates into stock market
success.
Economic history contains many examples of emerging markets that
submerged. In an article dramatically entitled “Survival,” Stephen Brown,
William Goetzmann, and Stephen Ross identify thirty-six stock exchanges
operating at the beginning of the twentieth century. Of the thirty-six, “more
than half suffered at least one major hiatus in trading…usually due to
nationalizations or war.” More distressingly to investors who believe in the
inevitability of progress, of the thirty-six markets that operated in 1900,
fully fifteen remained classified as emerging markets more than 100 years
later. One market, located in Serbia’s Belgrade, fails even to make the
twenty-first century list of emerging markets. The authors dryly note that
“in fact, the very term ‘emerging markets’ admits the possibility that these
markets might fail.”17
In recent years, investors enjoyed the opportunity to invest in an ever-
expanding set of developing markets. Morgan Stanley Capital International,
the leading constructor of non-U.S. market indices, began tracking
emerging markets in 1988 with an index of eight countries ranging from
Mexico to Jordan to Thailand. Five years later, the population stood at
nineteen with notable additions of India, Korea, and Portugal. By 1998, the
total reached twenty-eight as South Africa, Russia, and a number of central
European countries joined MSCI’s coverage universe. In 2001, Egypt and
Morocco joined the index, while Sri Lanka departed. Because of investment
restrictions and lack of liquidity, Venezuela left the index in 2006, bringing
the emerging market country population to twenty-five.
On occasion, countries move out of the emerging world to the
developed world. In 1997 Portugal made the leap, and in 2001 Greece
followed. As emerging economies make progress, more countries will
advance to the ranks of the developed world.
The Bull Case for Emerging Markets
Antoine van Agtmael, longtime investor in emerging markets, articulates a
bullish perspective on emerging markets in his excellent book, The
Emerging Markets Century.


=== PAGE 217 ===
As we enter the Emerging Markets Century, the time has come to
rethink what we mean by “risk.” Gazing back in the rearview
mirror, we once regarded emerging markets as crisis-prone, volatile,
desperately poor, small in the global economy to the point of
irrelevancy, dependent on Western consumer markets, and heavily
protected. Stock markets were poorly regulated and prone to
manipulation; a lack of participation by institutional investors and
pension funds left much room for speculation and insider trading;
corporate disclosure was notoriously poor.
More developed markets, in contrast, led in economic stability,
technology, market size, and transparency. A better legal framework
and corporate governance protected investors while domestic
pension funds and a large mutual funds industry were ready buyers
of stocks and bonds. And, of course, a huge gap remained in the
size, sophistication, and quality of companies between the West and
“the Rest.”
Today, the case for emerging market investing is different
precisely because (1) these markets themselves are less different and
more global than before and (2) a growing number of companies are
becoming world-class. While emerging markets were until fairly
recently regarded as a small yet risky niche, the increasing
importance of these countries and the importance of these
companies has propelled emerging markets from being the spice of
an investment portfolio to a more central role that is more
mainstream and less of a gamble. The practical implications of this
broad-based shift both in real and perceived risk are that emerging
markets should be a core component of investors’ portfolios rather
than an afterthought but that they will also be less exciting going
forward.18
While Antoine van Agtmael’s work supports the role of emerging
markets equities as a core asset class, their relatively immature regulatory
environments argue for special care on the part of investment managers.
Emerging markets may be “less exciting going forward,” but they will
continue to be exciting.


=== PAGE 218 ===
Emerging Market Equity Prices and Inflation
The link between inflation in the United States and emerging market stock
returns suffers from the same issues as the link between U.S. inflation and
foreign developed stock returns. That said, basic commodities play an
important role in a number of emerging markets economies. To the extent
that the U.S. suffers commodity-price-induced inflationary pressures,
investments in emerging markets stocks may provide partial protection
against the inflation.
Alignment of Interests
Development of market infrastructure in emerging economies proceeds in
fits and starts as legislators, regulators, and corporate managements learn
the rules of the game. Investors accustomed to the protections afforded in
the United States find most emerging markets quite inhospitable. Quality of
securities legislation ranges from poor to good, enforcement of regulations
varies from inadequate to adequate, and fidelity of managements to
shareholders’ interests falls all over the lot. Caveat emptor.
Government policies sometimes interfere with investor interests,
occasionally in dramatic fashion. In 1998, during the Asian crisis, Malaysia
restricted the convertibility of the ringgit, effectively prohibiting foreign
investors from repatriating funds. Because of bad behavior regarding capital
controls, MSCI removed Malaysia from one of the firm’s emerging market
indices. Not until Malaysia removed capital controls in late 1999 did the
country reestablish its credentials as a full-fledged member of the MSCI
roster.
In emerging markets, corporate actions resemble, at times, the Wild
West. One market observer suggested that Russian equity investors put
money in enterprises where management attempts grand theft and avoid
commitments to companies where management engages in petty larceny.
The rationale for the superficially contradictory advice lay in the notion that
managements of truly valuable enterprises attempted to steal the entire
entity, while managements of less valuable enterprises simply sought to
pilfer small pieces.


=== PAGE 219 ===
The inferior alignment of interests facing investors in emerging markets
represents one of the critical risk factors that cause investors to demand
higher rates of return for emerging markets equity investments. Since
investors operate in an environment with less-evolved frameworks for the
definition and resolution of legal and regulatory issues, the resulting
uncertainty forces sensible investors to seek premium returns.
Emerging markets governments occasionally drive wedges between the
interests of shareholders and managements. Controls on the ownership and
voting rights of local shares sometimes lead to the creation of two classes of
share owners, with attendant problems for the second-class foreign investor.
Capital controls, although infrequently imposed, interfere with the ability of
foreign investors to transfer funds freely. Government regulation in the
emerging markets contains the potential to harm foreign investor interests.
In other instances, corporate managements fail to act in shareholder
interests. A particularly prevalent problem in many Asian countries
involves family-controlled companies satisfying family desires at the
expense of external minority shareholder wishes. An absence of
transparency compounds the problem as outside investors often lack the
information required to identify and address insider-dealing issues.
As emerging markets mature and as global capital markets liberalize,
structural problems with misalignment of interests become less severe.
Nonetheless, rational investors require a substantial return premium to
expose assets to companies that operate in the less-than-ideal emerging
markets legal and regulatory framework.
Market Characteristics
At December 31, 2006, emerging markets equities totaled $7.2 trillion
according to MSCI. Ranging from India ($824 billion) and China ($816
billion), which by market-capitalization would rank in the middle of the
developed market cohort, to the much smaller markets of Peru ($38 billion)
and Jordan ($30 billion), the emerging markets universe encompasses a
broad range of countries. Asia accounts for 53 percent of emerging market
equity assets, Latin America for 20 percent, Europe for 16 percent, and
Africa and the Middle East for 12 percent.


=== PAGE 220 ===
Emerging market valuations trumped those of the United States at year-
end 2006 (at least for investors seeking value). The emerging markets
dividend yield amounted to 2.1 percent relative to 1.7 percent for the United
States. The price-earnings ratio stood at 15.6, representing a substantial
discount to the U.S. market level of 19.5. Emerging markets traded at a
price-book ratio of 2.5, identical to the U.S. level.
Summary
Investors in emerging markets equities require substantial expected returns
to compensate for the high level of fundamental investment risk. During the
period for which good data exist, investors received inadequate
compensation for risks incurred. From 1985, when the World Bank’s
International Finance Corporation began measuring emerging markets
equity returns, to December 2006, emerging markets equities produced 12.0
percent per annum returns (as measured by the IFC Global Composite)
relative to 13.1 percent for the S&P 500 and 12.4 percent for EAFE. The
deficit relative to developed market returns indicates that emerging market
investors accepted higher fundamental risks than developed market
investors without earning excess returns. Investors in emerging markets
hope the future treats them better than the past.
Because of macroeconomic and microeconomic concerns, emerging
markets equities promise high expected returns with commensurately high
levels of risk. An allocation to emerging markets stocks contains the
potential to enhance the risk and return characteristics of well-structured
investment portfolios.
CONCLUSION
Investors find a number of essential components of a well-diversified,
equity-oriented portfolio in the traditional asset classes of domestic equity,
U.S. Treasury bonds, foreign developed market equity, and foreign
emerging market equity. Domestic and foreign equities drive portfolio
returns, while Treasury bonds provide diversifying power. By employing


=== PAGE 221 ===
traditional asset classes in a well-diversified portfolio, investors build a
strong foundation for investment success.
In the course of providing basic, valuable, differentiable characteristics
to investor portfolios, traditional asset classes rely on market-generated
returns. By investing in asset classes in which market forces drive returns,
investors achieve a high level of confidence that the various asset classes
will produce the expected long-term results, dramatically reducing the risk
of active-management slippage between hoped-for asset class performance
and actual outcomes.
Traditional asset classes trade in broad, deep, investable markets,
ensuring substantial levels of commitment by a range of Wall Street firms.
The resulting competition leads to market transparency and efficiency,
increasing the likelihood that investors transact on fair terms.
 
Investors without active management expertise rely primarily on traditional
asset classes for portfolio construction, perhaps, adding exposure to
Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities and an index of real estate
investment trusts to round out the portfolio. Investors with active
management expertise not only enjoy the possibility of producing market-
beating returns for domestic and foreign equities, but also benefit from the
inclusion of asset classes that depend on active management, including
absolute return, real assets, and private equity.
OceanofPDF.com


=== PAGE 222 ===
8
Alternative Asset Classes
Alternative asset classes—absolute return, real assets, and private equity—
contribute to the portfolio construction process by pushing back the
efficient frontier, allowing creation of portfolios with higher returns for a
given level of risk or with lower risk for a given level of return. Investors
who employ alternative assets as legitimate tools in the portfolio allocation
process reduce dependence on traditional marketable securities, facilitating
the structuring of truly diversified portfolios.
As separate asset classes, each alternative investment category adds
something distinctive and important to portfolio characteristics. Absolute
return and real assets provide diversification, generating returns driven by
factors materially different from those determining results of other asset
classes. In contrast, private equity returns depend on many factors common
to the determination of marketable equity returns. Although private
investments provide little diversification, well-selected private holdings
contain the potential to make a dramatic contribution to portfolio returns.
Prices for many alternative assets lack the efficiency typical of prices
for traditional marketable securities, leading to opportunities for astute
managers to add substantial value in the investment process. In fact,
investors in alternative asset classes must pursue active management since
market returns do not exist in the sense of an investable passive option.
Even if investors could purchase the median result in an alternative asset
class, the results would likely disappoint. Longer term median historical
returns have lagged comparable marketable security results, both in
absolute and risk-adjusted terms. Only by generating superior active returns
do investors realize the promise of investing in alternative assets.
ABSOLUTE RETURN


=== PAGE 223 ===
Absolute return investing consists of inefficiency-exploiting marketable
securities positions that exhibit little or no correlation to traditional stock
and bond investments. Well-structured absolute return portfolios provide
equity-like returns with powerful diversifying characteristics.
Absolute return managers reduce market risk by investing in event-
driven or value-driven situations expected to behave independently of
market forces. Event-driven positions depend on the completion of a
specific corporate finance transaction such as the consummation of a
merger or the emergence of a company from bankruptcy. Value-driven
strategies employ hedged portfolios in which short positions offset long
positions, dramatically reducing the investor’s systematic risk. Absolute
return managers seek to generate high levels of returns, independent of
market results, in contrast to the relative benchmark-beating returns sought
by active marketable security managers.
The short duration of absolute return strategies makes the short-term
cost of funds a fair starting point for evaluating manager performance. The
basic math of hedged positions implies that (in the absence of skill and fees)
investors deserve a money market rate of return.* If managers add value,
returns will exceed short-term rates. If managers fail to add value, returns
will fall short of money market rates.
Without active management, absolute return does not exist. The
fundamental notion of absolute return investing rests on identification and
successful exploitation of inefficiencies in pricing marketable securities. In
the absence of value added by active managers, investors receive money
market rates of return, appropriate compensation for creating positions
without material market exposure.
Event-driven Investing
Event-driven opportunities exist because of the complexities inherent in
business combinations and corporate reorganizations. Mainstream portfolio
managers recognize that the determinants of the merger endgame and the
bankruptcy resolution differ materially from the factors that predominate in
day-to-day security valuation. The legal and regulatory environment
changes upon announcement of a proposed combination or reorganization,


=== PAGE 224 ===
giving the informed specialist an advantage over the competent generalist.
Superior analytical skills create a meaningful edge for active event-driven
investors.
The opportunity exploited by event-driven investors stems in part from
sales of securities by investors unwilling to commit the resources to develop
a thorough understanding of the circumstances surrounding complex
corporate finance transactions. In the case of distressed securities, selling
pressure comes from investors unable or unwilling to hold securities of
failing or failed companies. The sometimes massive supply of securities
from holders uncomfortable with positions in companies undergoing basic
structural change allows event-driven investors to establish positions with
attractive embedded returns.
Merger arbitrage represents a typical event-driven absolute return
strategy, with results related to the manager’s ability to predict the
probability that a deal will close, the likely timing and the expected
consideration for the transaction. Upon announcement of a stock-for-stock
deal, the price of the target company’s stock generally rises to a level
somewhat below the acquirer’s offer, creating an opportunity for the merger
arbitrageur to profit. Uncertainty regarding the ultimate outcome of the
transaction causes many holders to sell, motivated by the concern that gains
stimulated by the merger offer might disappear for any of a number of
reasons. After careful assessment of deal-specific factors, merger arbitrage
investors buy the stock of the target company and sell shares of the
acquiring company, hoping to profit from the elimination of the spread
when the transaction closes. Because the arbitrageur holds long positions
offset by short positions, the direction of the overall market plays little role
in determining the position’s returns. Instead, results depend on the merger
arbitrageur’s ability to assess correctly the factors relevant to the ultimate
conclusion of the transaction.
Newell Rubbermaid Merger Arbitrage
The March 1999 combination of Newell and Rubbermaid illustrates some
of the market dynamics underpinning event-driven investment
opportunities. After the October 1998 announcement of the proposed
merger, Rubbermaid shares responded by rising nearly 25 percent as shown


=== PAGE 225 ===
in Figure 8.1. Trading volumes increased more than ten-fold, from an
average of 566,000 shares per day in the week prior to the announcement to
5,960,000 shares per day in the week following. Taking advantage of the
merger induced price rise, traditional long-only investors exited the stock
and created an opportunity for merger arbitrageurs to establish positions.
The terms of the definitive agreement called for a tax-free exchange of
shares in which holders of Rubbermaid would receive 0.7883 shares of
Newell upon closing, expected in early 1999. By buying a share of
Rubbermaid at the post announcement price of $31.81 and selling 0.7883 of
a share of Newell at $43.25, arbitrageurs generated net proceeds of $2.28
per share. If the companies were to complete the transaction on the
originally proposed terms, arbitrageurs would have equivalent value
positions at the closing. Upon consummation of the deal, merger
arbitrageurs would close out positions by delivering Newell shares received
from the Rubbermaid exchange to cover the original Newell short sale.
Figure 8.1 Merger Arbitrage Spread Narrows as Closing Date Nears


=== PAGE 226 ===
Merger Between Newell and Rubbermaid October 12, 1998–March 15,
1999
Back-of-the-envelope calculations illustrate the return characteristics of
the transaction. When the deal closed on March 24, 1999, merger
arbitrageurs earned the $2.28 post announcement spread between the two
stocks and a short rebate of about $0.57 for a total of approximately $2.85.
Cash flow yield played essentially no role in the return calculation since the
dividends earned on the Rubbermaid shares offset the dividends paid on the
Newell shares. Based on an initial capital commitment of $31.81 per share,
the position delivered a gross return of about 9 percent over a five month
period, equivalent to an annualized return in the low 20 percent range.1
The Newell Rubbermaid combination proceeded without a hitch, as the
spread between Rubbermaid and Newell shares narrowed week-by-week
until the scheduled closing. Not all merger arbitrage transactions proceed as
smoothly. The September 1998 combination of WorldCom and MCI
Communications began in November 1996 as a proposal by British
Telecommunications plc to acquire MCI in the largest cross border
transaction ever. Between the initiation of merger discussions and the
ultimate resolution, merger arbitrageurs wrestled with a laundry list of
problems, including antitrust concerns, regulatory approvals, changes in
company business strategy, corporate operating difficulties, international
political issues, and competition from competing bidders.* Regardless of
whether deals take a simple path from inception to resolution or follow a
convoluted route, the returns to merger arbitrage investors depend far more
on the specific event than on the general direction of the market.
 
In the distressed securities area, event-driven investors look for opportunity
in securities of companies undergoing reorganization. Because of the
complexity of the issues surrounding bankruptcy, many market participants
sell positions regardless of price, creating an opportunity for hard working
investors to profit. By assessing the timing of the company’s emergence
from bankruptcy and valuing the expected package of securities, players in
the distressed securities arena generate returns more dependent on events


=== PAGE 227 ===
important to the bankruptcy process than on the level of the overall stock
market.
Event-driven strategies lack the power to insulate investors completely
from financial market moves. In the case of merger arbitrage, factors
influencing the stock market or the financing market may alter the
likelihood either that a particular merger will be completed or that mergers
in general will move forward, causing a commonality of influence. In the
case of distressed investing, to the extent that investors receive equity
interests as part of a package of securities distributed upon a company’s
reorganization, the market exerts direct influence on the ultimate return to a
distressed securities investment. In spite of identifiable links between event-
driven investing and market moves, under a wide range of circumstances
event-driven strategies provide meaningful portfolio diversification.
In times of financial crisis, the correlation between event-driven
strategies and market activity increases to uncomfortable levels. During the
stock market crash in October 1987, merger arbitrage positions fell in step
with the general market, providing little protection in the short run against
the dramatic market decline. As time passed, investors recognized that
companies continued to meet contractual obligations, ultimately completing
all merger deals previously announced. The return of confidence improved
merger arbitrage results, providing handsome returns relative to the market.
Results of two prominent merger arbitrage firms, which later formed the
base for Yale’s absolute return portfolio, illustrate the importance of
evaluating performance over reasonable time horizons. Pursuing the
conservative approach of investing only in announced deals, the two firms
reported combined results of -17.9 percent for the fourth quarter of 1987,
somewhat ahead of the S&P 500 return of -22.5 percent but well behind
expectations for event-driven strategies. Even though no merger deals
“broke,” the market turmoil caused investors to demand higher
compensation for merger arbitrage risk, resulting in a dramatic widening of
spreads. In the first quarter of 1988 the arbitrage managers rebounded,
posting results of 16.3 percent, far ahead of the S&P 500 returns of 5.7
percent. Viewed in isolation, the last quarter of 1987 provided disappointing
double digit losses coincident with the stock market crash, failing to protect
the portfolio during the period of crisis. Viewed as a package, the fourth
quarter of 1987 with the worst results ever for both firms and the first


=== PAGE 228 ===
quarter of 1988 with the best results ever for both firms, essentially
preserved assets and provided meaningful diversification relative to the
equity market’s losses.
Not all periods of financial trauma end as happily as the aftermath of
the crash of October 1987. In August 2007, an extraordinary credit crisis
called into question the viability of an estimated $400 billion of merger-
related financing. As a result, prospective returns on the First Data and
TXU merger arbitrage deals skyrocketed from low double digit levels in
June 2007 to more than 70 percent in mid-August 2007. Both First Data and
TXU closed, providing handsome returns to intrepid investors who made
late summer bets on the deals. In contrast to the 1987 experience, however,
a number of 2007 vintage deals failed to close. The link, however unusual,
between markets and merger deals lessens the diversifying power of merger
arbitrage. That said, even though diversifying financial assets, including
absolute return strategies, may show high correlation to marketable
securities for short time periods, over reasonable investment horizons assets
driven by fundamentally different factors produce fundamentally different
patterns of returns.
Because event-driven investors strive to hit singles and doubles,
creating a broadly diversified portfolio makes sense. In an environment
without huge potential winners to offset inevitable costly mistakes, careful
investors limit the costs that any one position might impose on the portfolio.
Event-driven portfolios benefit from engaging managers with a broad
set of investment tools. Hiring a specialist focused only on one aspect of the
business, say merger arbitrage, forces investors to ride a return rollercoaster.
When opportunities abound, investors reap attractive returns from the niche
strategy. If high returns attract capital to the activity, or if the supply of
investment opportunities wanes, specialized investors continue to commit
funds to their sole area of expertise, ultimately reaping poor returns from
funds invested at inopportune times.
In contrast, if a manager develops expertise in more than one event-
driven strategy, when returns appear sparse in one segment funds flow
naturally to more attractive segments. The ability to target areas of relative
opportunity dampens the inevitable fluctuations experienced by focused
funds and creates the possibility of structuring higher return, lower risk
portfolios.


=== PAGE 229 ===
Value-Driven Investing
Value-driven absolute return strategies rest on the manager’s ability to
identify undervalued and overvalued securities, establish positions, and
reduce market exposure through hedging activity. If an investor purchases a
portfolio of attractively priced stocks and sells short an equivalent amount
of expensively priced stocks, the offsetting long and short positions
eliminate systematic exposure to the equity market. Results depend entirely
on stock-picking ability, with the long/short investor enjoying the
opportunity to add value with both long ideas and short ideas. Skillful
value-driven managers win on both sides of the portfolio.
While value-driven and event-driven strategies share a lack of
correlation with traditional marketable securities, value-driven portfolios
require a longer time horizon than do event-driven portfolios. Expected
holding periods for merger arbitrage and distressed securities correspond to
the anticipated date of corporate combination or bankruptcy resolution,
implying a reasonably short duration for event-driven strategies. In contrast,
value-driven positions lack the clear triggers present in event-driven
investing. To the consternation of fund managers, undervalued stocks
frequently decline, while overvalued positions often rise, leading to poor
near-term performance relative to expectations. Even without adverse price
moves in the short run, mispricings identified by long/short investors may
take years to resolve.
Value-driven managers share much in common with active managers of
traditional marketable securities. On the long side, concentrated portfolios
of thoroughly researched securities provide the underpinnings for
investment success. On the short side, the same bottom-up techniques of
fundamental analysis used to evaluate long positions provide the basis for
identifying overvalued securities. Adding the flexibility to exploit
overvalued positions—through short sales—doubles the opportunity for a
manager to add value. While short selling shares a common foundation with
long investing, a successful short portfolio represents more than a richly
priced inverse of a long portfolio.
Short Selling Challenges


=== PAGE 230 ===
Management of the short side of the portfolio poses several challenges
peculiar to selling securities short. First, investors frequently underestimate
the resilience of corporate management. Even when the facts and figures
indicate that a company deserves classification as one of the “living dead,”
managers frequently find a way to escape the seemingly inevitable
consequences of their circumstances. Second, the portfolio management
implications of adverse price movements require greater diversification of
short positions. If a stock moves against a short seller by increasing in price,
the position increases in size. To take advantage of the now more
attractively priced short opportunity the investor faces the uncomfortable
prospect of further increasing the position. Starting with a modest allocation
to a particular short idea allows an increase in position size without creating
an uncomfortable concentration in a single stock. Contrast the dynamics of
a losing short position with the behavior of a losing long position. As the
long’s price declines it becomes a smaller portion of the portfolio, reducing
its impact on returns and facilitating new purchases at the newly
discounted, relatively more attractive price. The simple math of price
behavior argues for running reasonably diversified portfolios of short
positions. Short sellers face challenges from success, as well as from
failure. When the stock price of a fundamentally troubled company crashes,
the short seller benefits, but the size of the short position declines
dramatically, requiring identification of attractive replacement candidates.
While long managers often run with successful investments for years, short
managers hope to operate on a treadmill, with frequent turnover of holdings
caused by the exit of winning positions from the portfolio. The price
dynamics of short selling cause successful short managers to follow and
hold a large number of securities.
Aside from a peculiar set of investment challenges, short sellers face
some unusual technical problems in managing portfolio positions. To
execute trades, short sellers borrow securities to deliver to the buyer on the
other side of the transaction. (Buyers purchasing shares, whether from a
short seller or a natural seller, expect to receive securities on the trade’s
settlement date.) As long as short sellers maintain the borrow, the position
remains intact. If the short seller loses the borrow because the security
lender recalls the security, the short seller must replace the borrow or lose
the position. When the market for borrowing a particular security becomes


=== PAGE 231 ===
tight, short sellers face a short squeeze. Security borrowers tend to have
most trouble with small, less liquid companies, exactly the type of security
likely to present interesting short opportunities.
The unusual set of problems confronting short sellers places an effective
limit on portfolio size, forcing managers to constrain the level of assets
under management. A reasonable portfolio size constitutes a necessary
precondition for the potential to add value, as excessive levels of assets
amount to a nearly insurmountable barrier to success. Even though the
aggressive assumption that value-driven managers might outperform the
market by as much as several percentage points each on the long and short
sides seems to fly in the face of traditional active manager experience,
limits on portfolio size provide hope for significant outperformance by
long/short managers.
Return Expectations
Hedge fund managers who attempt to produce truly independent returns
generally articulate reasonably modest goals. Consider a fund manager with
a portfolio consisting of equal measures of long positions and short
positions. From a market perspective, the longs offset the shorts. In a rising
market, losses from the shorts offset gains from the longs. In a falling
market, losses from the longs offset gains from the shorts. Balanced
long/short investing takes the market out of the equation.
Security selection represents the primary source of return for disciplined
long/short investors. To the extent that managers identify undervalued long
positions and overvalued short positions, the portfolio stands to benefit
from twice the security selection power available to long-only managers.
A secondary source of returns for long/short managers comes from the
rebate earned from establishing short positions. Short sales generate cash
proceeds that earn close to a money-market rate of interest. While the short
rebate adds to the return of the long/short investor, a short rebate proves
insufficient in and of itself to justify pursuing a long/short investment
strategy. If an investor wishes to earn a money-market return, buying a
money-market fund provides a more direct, less costly, and less risky route
to generating cash returns.


=== PAGE 232 ===
Suppose long/short fund managers exhibit security selection skill
consistent with top-quartile, long-only domestic equity managers. For the
ten years ending December 31, 2006, one widely used universe of active
managers showed top quartile returns of 2.6 percent per annum above the
market.* If a long/short manager produces top quartile results on each of
the long and short sides of the portfolio, security selection generates a
return of 5.2 percent. The expected magnitude of gains available from
astute security selection falls far short of double digits.
Adding a short-term interest rate (reflecting the short rebate) to the
value added from security selection produces the gross return for long/short
investing. Over the ten years ending December 31, 2006, short-term interest
rates averaged 3.7 percent per annum. Combining the top-quartile security
selection return of 5.2 percent with the money-market return yields a total
return of 8.9 percent, before fees.
Fees create a substantial burden for hedge fund investors. A
management fee of one percent and a profits interest of 20 percent combine
to subtract 2.6 percent from the gross return, leaving a net return of 6.3
percent for the investor.* Even with substantial active management success
(as defined by two top-quartile results), net returns to long/short hedge fund
investors show only a modest increment over money-market rates.
In cases where long/short managers exhibit mediocre stock picking
skill, results disappoint. Consider the results of the median equity manager.
For the ten years ending December 31, 2006, the median active domestic
equity manager produced gross returns of 1.1 percent per annum above the
market return. Doubling the median active management return produces a
2.2 percent return for security selection. Incorporating the cash return of 3.7
percent generates a gross return of 5.9 percent. The fee burden shaves the
net return to 3.9 percent, a result disturbingly close to the 3.7 percent return
of simply holding cash!
Finally, contemplate the poor position of an underperforming manager.
Over the ten years ending December 31, 2006, third-quartile managers
underperformed the market by 0.1 percent before fees. With an active
management deficit, long/short investors earned 3.5 percent, which falls
short of the return for holding cash. Fees take the gross return to a 2.0


=== PAGE 233 ===
percent net result, bringing the misery of below-cash returns to investors
suffering the consequences of poor active management.
Even though average and below-average investment results sting
investors, the investment manager makes out nicely in all cases. Regardless
of performance, the manager collects a one percent fee, representing more-
or-less standard compensation for traditional long-only money
management. Adding the profits interest allows the skillful top-quartile
manager to earn 2.6 percent, a hefty load on a single-digit return. Total fees
for median stock pickers amount to 2.0 percent. Even in instances where net
returns to investors fail to reach the returns available on cash, the manager
profits handsomely. Fees for third-quartile performers total 1.5 percent,
adding the insult of excessive fees to the injury of poor performance.
The example of balanced long/short equity management provides a
powerful illustration of the central role that active management plays in
absolute return investing. In the absence of superior active results, investors
face certain disappointment. Long/short equity managers must consistently
produce better than top-quartile returns to justify the fee structure accepted
by hedge fund investors. Investors unable to identify the best of the best
should pursue passive investment strategies.
Yale’s absolute return portfolio provides an example of the potential of
the asset class and conforms to the expectations generated by considering
the fundamental investment attributes of absolute return strategies.
Established as a separate asset class in 1990, the pioneering portfolio
produced 13.2 percent per annum returns for the seventeen years ending
June 30, 2007. With a remarkably low risk level of 5.7 percent standard
deviation of returns, the risk/reward relationship indicates that managers
exploited some rewarding market anomalies.* The absolute return
portfolio’s diversifying power exceeded expectations, showing essentially
no correlation to domestic equities (0.02 vs. the Wilshire 5000 Index) and
domestic fixed income (0.02 vs. the Lehman Brothers Government
Corporate Index).
Survivorship Bias and Backfill Bias


=== PAGE 234 ===
Like other alternative assets, absolute return investments lack an investable
benchmark, forcing investors to look elsewhere for defining characteristics
of the asset class. Because of absolute return’s limited institutional history,
understanding its quantitative attributes proves more difficult than
understanding those of real estate, leveraged buyouts, and venture capital.
Students of more longstanding alternative investment approaches enjoy the
benefit of more than three decades of data on active manager results that
describe the experience of institutional investors and provide intriguing
clues about the character of fund performance. The paucity of data
regarding absolute return strategies requires investors to seek alternative
methods for estimating asset class attributes.
Survivorship bias and backfill bias present a serious problem for
investors in marketable securities. Liquidity facilitates the hiring and firing
of stock and bond managers, leading to churning in the population of active
managers. Poor performers leave (survivorship bias) and strong firms enter
(backfill bias), constantly altering the character of the standards implicit in
the collection of returns used for assessing active managers.
Manager churn presents less of a problem for investors in illiquid assets.
Managers of private assets taint the data pool with considerably less
frequency than their marketable security counterparts. Institutions tend to
select real estate, venture capital, and leveraged buyout funds from a
reasonably well-defined list of acceptable alternatives, leading to a fairly
coherent definition of any given year’s institutional cohort. The partnership
vehicles through which investors conduct most private investing preclude
easy departure from the business. Private investing results—good, bad, or
indifferent—play out over the term of the partnership regardless of the
degree of confidence investors express in the fund managers.
Absolute return suffers from particularly acute forms of survivorship
bias and backfill bias, related to the combination of fairly high liquidity and
relative immaturity. As large numbers of new (and not-so-new) entrants fail,
the firms and their mediocre records disappear. Immaturity suggests a
substantial amount of flux, as managers posting attractive risk-adjusted
returns enter the realm of institutional acceptability, adding sometimes eye-
popping records to the store of absolute return information. Liquidity allows
easy entry and exit, creating instability beneath the surface of the pool used
to evaluate manager returns.


=== PAGE 235 ===
Statistics on past performance of hedge funds fail to provide much
insight into the character of this relatively new segment of the investment
world. Survivorship bias presents a pervasive problem for gatherers of
historical return data. The fact that poorly performing firms fail at higher
rates than well-performing firms causes data on manager returns to
overstate past results, since compilations of data at any point in time from
the current group of managers inevitably lack complete performance
numbers from firms that failed in the past. In the well-established,
comprehensively documented world of traditional marketable securities,
survivorship bias presents a significant, albeit quantifiable problem. In the
less-well-established, less comprehensively documented arena of hedge
fund investing, survivorship bias creates a much more substantial
informational challenge.
Even when database managers attempt to include results from failed
firms, the history of returns often lacks completeness. Because most
compilers of data rely on self-reporting of results by hedge funds, the
integrity of the history depends on the fidelity of the hedge funds. As
struggling hedge funds fight to stay in business, reporting of results to third-
party database providers takes a back burner to the day-to-day challenges of
crisis management.
Consider the record of Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM), the
infamous hedge fund that nearly brought down the world’s financial system.
According to the New York Times, the database of Tremont Capital
Management, a leading purveyor of hedge fund data, contains LTCM’s
performance only through October 1997, nearly a year prior to the firm’s
collapse.
Inception-to-date-of-reporting-cessation performance (March 1994
through October 1997) for LTCM stood at 32.4 percent per year net to
investors, representing an impressive return on a large amount of capital.
Obviously, Long-Term Capital’s early record inflated the hedge fund
industry’s aggregate results. From the point in October 1997 when Long-
Term Capital stopped reporting results to the point of the firm’s October
1998 demise, returns (if they can be called returns) amounted to -91.8
percent. The staggering loss appears nowhere in Tremont’s treasure trove of
data.


=== PAGE 236 ===
The yawning chasm between Tremont’s reported 32.4 percent per
annum and LTCM’s actual -27.0 percent per annum produces a staggering
gap between perception and reality. The statistical omission of the
implosion of LTCM inflates history in a manner that fundamentally
misleads investors regarding the true character of hedge fund investing.
Statistical descriptions of hedge fund returns frequently suffer not only
from survivorship bias, but also from backfill bias. As hedge funds became
popular in the 1990s, only those funds with successful track records rose
above the fray, attracting attention from market observers and money from
investors. Funds with mediocre records languished in obscurity. Funds with
strong returns garnered assets and acclaim, entering the consultants’
manager universes and generating a substantial positive spin on the reported
returns. In many instances, the keepers of the numbers added the past
results of newly found strong performers to the ranks of the reporting
managers, providing an unrepresentative boost to past performance data.
Backfill bias causes data on hedge fund performance to overstate the
realities of the hedge fund marketplace.
Academic studies that analyze the impact of survivorship bias and
backfill bias come to some stunning conclusions. In a study of 3,500 hedge
funds over more than ten years, Roger Ibbotson of the Yale School of
Management concluded that survivorship bias added 2.9 percent annually to
returns and backfill bias added an additional 4.6 percent annually to
returns.2 In aggregate, data-gathering errors inflated reported returns by
fully 7.5 percent per annum, an enormous increment in a world where the
difference between success and failure often depends on a few tenths of a
percentage point. Burton Malkiel of Princeton University, in examining a
well-known database, observed that of 331 hedge funds that reported results
in 1996, more than 75 percent disappeared by 2004.3 As expected, the
returns of the live funds exceeded the returns of the dead funds. Perhaps not
so expected was the 7.4 percent annual return differential between the two
groups of funds. For the eight-year period, Malkiel estimates survivorship
bias inflated returns by an average of 4.4 percent per annum and backfill
bias boosted results by an average of 7.3 percent per annum. Ibbotson and
Malkiel’s studies call into question the usefulness of hedge fund databases.
Survivorship bias and backfill bias matter.


=== PAGE 237 ===
Hedge Funds with Market-Related Risk
Consider two broad categories of hedge funds—those that avoid market risk
and those that accept market risk. In cases where funds steer clear of market
risk, investors without skill deserve to earn only money-market levels of
return. The argument that supports a cash-like return for investors who do
not accept market risk depends on the line of reasoning underpinning the
analysis of long/short manager returns: those hedge fund strategies that do
not expose assets to systematic market risk depend solely on strong active
results to achieve gross results in excess of cash returns.
Many hedge fund strategies expose assets to various types of systematic
risk. In fact, Goldman Sachs and Merrill Lynch each created and marketed
synthetic hedge funds to mimic the systematic risk components of the hedge
fund world. Merrill Lynch’s Factor Index, which employs the S&P 500,
Russell 2000, MSCI Emerging Markets, U.S. Dollar Index, and One-Month
LIBOR, weights each of the components to produce returns similar to those
of the Hedge Fund Research Weighted Composite Index (HFRI). Merrill
Lynch touts the strong relationship between the Factor Index and HFRI,
noting a 95 percent correlation between June 2003 and June 2006. In
marketing materials, the investment bank suggests that the Factor Index
produces hedge fund exposure “in a less expensive, more transparent and
more liquid manner.”4
The notion of a passive hedge fund investment turns logic on its head.
Hedge funds rest on the premise of hedging, or offsetting, market exposure.
The idea that hedge fund returns could be explained and replicated by a
collection of passive market indices suggests that managers are not doing
their job and that investors are being sold a bill of goods. If investors really
want to vary exposure to Merrill Lynch’s Factor Index components, they
should simply alter their allocations to the S&P 500, Russell 2000, et al.
The oxymoron of passive hedge fund exposure belongs in no serious
investor’s portfolio.
Perhaps the most blatant example of hedge fund exposure to market
forces lies in the long-only manager that simply establishes a private
partnership, calls it a hedge fund, and charges a 20 percent profits interest.
In such situations, the manager receives 20 percent of the market’s return,
an egregiously high fee for a factor over which the manager exerts no


=== PAGE 238 ===
control. Fair fee structures reward managers for adding value by
manipulating variables under the managers’ control. In the case of a fully
invested, long-only equity fund, a manager might be reasonably rewarded
with 20 percent of the incremental return over an appropriate market
benchmark, such as the S&P 500 for a large-capitalization domestic equity
manager or EAFE for a foreign-stock specialist. In situations where
managers receive a portion of gains over and above a fair benchmark, the
managers receive a reward for adding value. Unfortunately, hedge fund
structures almost universally pay managers a share of the profits after
returning capital, equivalent to no hurdle at all. Without a market-sensitive
hurdle rate, managers receive a percentage of the gains generated by market
exposure. The substantial toll imposed by typical hedge fund fee structures
causes the overwhelming number of hedge funds to fail to serve investor
interests.
Evaluating the returns of market-sensitive hedge funds poses nearly
insurmountable problems, challenging to even the most sophisticated of
investors. Separating the impact of the wind at the back (or the wind in the
face) contributed by market forces from the influence of the skill (or lack
thereof) exhibited in security selection proves incredibly difficult,
particularly in instances where the manager invests in a broad range of
markets and frequently adjusts market exposure. Regardless of the insight
garnered by investors investigating market-sensitive hedge funds, the
investment manager with an industry-standard deal structure receives a
share of the returns generated by market action, representing unreasonable
compensation for gains over which the manager exercises no control.
Absolute Return and Inflation
Since short duration characterizes absolute return investments, well-
structured absolute return portfolios exhibit high sensitivity to the short-
term cost of money. In event-driven merger arbitrage and distressed security
transactions, investors generally expect resolution within months, with
longer term deals extending to no more than a year or two. Since event-
driven investors factor the cost of funds into the investment equation, as
investors enter new deals the calculations reflect the then-current cost of
funds. Similarly, the short rebate earned by the value-driven long/short


=== PAGE 239 ===
investor represents a short-term cost of money. Just as money market rates
tend to track inflation rates, so does the short-duration, cost-of-funds-
sensitive absolute return portfolio.
Alignment of Interests
The profits interest typically paid by investors in hedge fund structures
creates an option for managers that threatens investor interests. In the event
of hedge fund gains, the manager shares in a substantial portion of profits.
In the event of hedge fund losses, the investor bears the burden alone. The
asymmetry of the profits-interest structure clearly favors the fund manager.
Significant co-investment on the part of the manager works to reduce, if
not eliminate, the dysfunction of the incentive-compensation option. In the
case where the hedge fund experiences good performance, the manager
reaps rewards both from the co-investment and from the profits interest. In
the case where the fund loses money, the manager’s co-investment causes a
sharing of the investor’s pain. A meaningful side-by-side commitment of
investment manager capital substantially reduces the misalignment of
manager and investor interests.
Market Characteristics
At December 31, 2006, the hedge fund industry contained an estimated
12,500 firms, controlling more than $1.5 trillion in equity capital.5
Moreover, because many hedge funds employ significant leverage, their
actual buying power exceeds their equity capital. Of the $1.5 trillion in
capital, approximately $880 billion in assets pursue strategies that might be
classified as absolute return.
Summary
Absolute return strategies require active management, since without
accepting market risk or identifying security mispricings investors expect to
earn only the risk-free rate. Since the very definition of absolute return rests
on lack of correlation with traditional marketable securities, exploitation of
individual security valuation anomalies forms the basis of the asset class.


=== PAGE 240 ===
Event-driven managers generate returns by conducting thorough research in
complex corners of the investment opportunity set, an area often avoided by
mainstream analysts. Value-driven managers attempt to add value by
identifying undervalued and overvalued securities, creating portfolios with
roughly offsetting long and short market exposures. Well-managed absolute
return portfolios provide a high return, low risk source of diversification.
Absolute return investing appeals to investors who believe that
providing funds to superior managers operating with few constraints will
lead to impressive investment results regardless of the upswings and
downswings of traditional marketable securities. Indeed, the experience of a
number of sophisticated institutional investors indicates that well-structured
absolute return portfolios produce high, uncorrelated returns with low risk,
adding an extremely valuable diversifying stream of returns to investor
portfolios. Of course, successful absolute return investors devote an
extraordinary amount of resources to identifying, engaging, and managing
high quaility managers.
Purveyors of hedge fund statistics paint a rosy picture wildly at odds
with reality. Academic studies show that survivorship bias and backfill bias
combine to inflate reported returns by anywhere from high single digits to
low double digits. A clear view of hedge fund returns would discourage
many thoughtful investors from entering the hedge fund arena.
On top of the enormous difficulties in identifying a group of genuinely
skilled investment managers and overcoming the obstacle of extremely rich
fee arrangements, investors confront a fundamental misalignment of
interests created by the option-like payoff embedded in most hedge fund fee
arrangements. Investors find coincidence of interests only in those
situations where the absolute return manager invests substantial personal
assets side-by-side with investor monies.
Casual approaches to fund selection lead to almost certain
disappointment. Absolute return investing belongs in the domain of
sophisticated investors who commit significant resources to the manager
evaluation process. While the promise of hedge funds proves attractive to
many market participants, those investors who fail to identify truly superior
active managers face a dismal reality. In the absence of superior security
selection, investment strategies that avoid market exposure deliver money-
market-like expected returns. The hefty fee arrangements typical of


=== PAGE 241 ===
absolute return funds erode the already low cash-like return to a truly
unacceptable level, especially after adjusting for risk. Absolute return
investors find generating risk-adjusted excess returns a daunting task.
REAL ASSETS
Real assets consist of ownership interests in investment vehicles that exhibit
a high correlation to inflation. Many investors, including educational
endowments, seek protection against inflation in order to offset inflation-
sensitive liabilities. Real assets include Treasury Inflation-Protected
Securities, real estate, timber, and oil and gas.
The strength of inflation protection varies with the type of real asset.
Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS, also known as Treasury
Inflation-Indexed Securities) track inflation precisely, at least as the
Consumer Price Index measures inflation. Oil and gas reserves change in
value in direct response to changes in energy prices, which represent a
substantial component of broad inflation gauges. Timber products bear a
similar relationship to price indices, although timber plays a far less
important role than does energy in overall price inflation. Real estate
holdings correlate with inflation less directly than primary inputs like
energy and timber, although when property markets operate in equilibrium a
strong link exists between real estate and inflation.
Aside from protecting portfolios against inflation, real assets produce
high levels of current cash flow and (in most cases) attractive expected total
returns. Unlike commodity indices, which give investors simple price
exposure, well-chosen and well-structured real assets investments provide
price exposure plus an intrinsic rate of return. For example, oil and gas
reserve purchases in the past two decades generated low double-digit rates
of return above and beyond the return from holding period increases in
energy prices. Price exposure plus an intrinsic rate of return trumps price
exposure alone.
In the future, the population of real assets alternatives might expand
beyond the conservative investments of TIPS and the high-return
alternatives of real estate, oil and gas, and timber. Pure commodity price
exposure holds little interest to sensible investors, as long-term returns


=== PAGE 242 ===
approximately equal inflation rates. TIPS provide inflation-like returns with
substantially less risk than commodity investments. Oil and gas reserve
purchases and timber investments provide investors with commodity price
exposure and an intrinsic rate of return, thereby dominating price exposure
alone. If markets provide other commodity-based opportunities to gain
price exposure and to earn an intrinsic rate of return, then those assets could
join the rank of sensible real assets alternatives.
Real assets play an important role in portfolios, particularly for
investors who seek to satisfy inflation-sensitive liabilities. The diversifying
power derived from correlation with inflation and the intrinsic rate of return
generated above simple price exposure argues for a significant allocation to
real assets.
Inflation-Linked Bonds
In January 1997, the U.S. Treasury began issuing TIPS, creating an
important new tool for U.S.-dollar-based investors. TIPS protect investors
from increases in the general level of prices by adjusting the principal
amount of the security for inflation. Since the fixed coupon rate on TIPS
applies to the inflation-adjusted principal of the bonds, both interest and
principal payments reflect changes in inflation rates.
The combination of extraordinary credit quality and precise protection
against inflation causes TIPS to produce modest real returns. During the
period that Lehman Brothers tracked TIPS’ real yields, inflation adjusted
returns ranged from 1.3 percent to 2.5 percent, averaging 1.9 percent.*
Investors pay a high price in the form of low expected returns from the
double-barreled conservatism of TIPS.
Just as standard U.S. Treasury bonds provide a riskless instrument for
investors wishing to generate certain nominal returns, TIPS provide a
riskless instrument for investors wishing to generate certain real returns.
Based on commonality of issuer, default-free status, and structural
similarities in payment of interest and principal, many market observers
group standard U.S. Treasury bonds with TIPS. In fact, when the U.S.
Treasury began issuing TIPS, Lehman Brothers, architect of the most


=== PAGE 243 ===
widely used debt market indices, placed TIPS in a cohort that included
regular-issue Treasury bonds.
The error of grouping regular Treasuries with TIPS lies in the
fundamentally different response of the two types of bonds to unanticipated
changes in the price level. Unanticipated inflation harms regular bonds by
reducing the purchasing power of the fixed stream of payments. In contrast,
unanticipated inflation benefits TIPS in the form of higher returns as
payments adjust for increases in the price level. Unexpected deflation helps
regular bonds by increasing the purchasing power of the fixed stream of
payments. In contrast, unexpected deflation hurts TIPS by reducing the
stream of periodic interest payments, even though deflation fails to reduce
the final principal payment. TIPS, far from belonging with standard bonds,
belong in the real assets category.
A comparison of a traditional U.S. Treasury note and a TIPS security
illustrates critical differences in the two instruments. Consider the U.S.
Treasury 4.25 percent Note due January 15, 2011 and the U.S. Treasury
Inflation-Indexed Security 3.5 percent Note due January 15,2011. At year-
end 2006, the straight bond and the inflation-protected bond boasted yields
to maturity of 4.7 percent and 2.4 percent, respectively. Because the bonds
share identical credit characteristics and identical maturity dates, the
difference in yields stems solely from inflation expectations. The 2.3
percent difference between the straight bond yield and the inflation-
protected bond yield represents the market’s best estimate of inflation over
the bonds’ term. If inflation exceeds 2.3 percent, the TIPS holder wins. If
inflation falls short of 2.3 percent, the straight bond owner wins.
At maturity, TIPS investors receive a possible bonus, as the bonds pay
the greater of the inflation-adjusted principal or the original face value. In a
deflationary world, investors benefit from the payment of the
nondiscounted par amount of the bonds. In an environment of general price
inflation, the right to receive par for the TIPS at maturity carries the greatest
value at the time of issuance. In concert with price increases, the indexed
value of the bond’s principal increases, creating a surplus over the par value
of the bond. Were deflationary conditions to develop, the accumulated
surplus would deplete before the par protection kicked in. Investors wishing
to enjoy the maximum protection of the par put constantly roll holdings of
TIPS into the most recently issued securities.


=== PAGE 244 ===
Some foreign governments issue inflation-protected securities. As with
standard bond issues, U.S.-domiciled investors approach non-U.S. Treasury
debt with caution. The United Kingdom, Canada, Sweden, France, Italy,
Germany, Greece, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand boast substantial
programs of inflation-indexed bond issuance. Because foreign government
bonds generally make payments in the currency of the realm, U.S. investors
face foreign exchange risk. The combination of divergent future domestic
and foreign inflation rates and unknown future foreign exchange
translations serve to render non-U.S. government inflation-indexed bonds
useless as a hedge against U.S. inflation.
U.S. corporate issuance of inflation-protected securities poses a
different set of issues. As is the case with straight corporate debt, inflation-
indexed corporate securities generally suffer from credit risk, illiquidity,
and unattractive call provisions. In addition, investors might consider the
implications of holding corporate inflation-protected securities in a high-
inflation environment. Just when the protection against price increases
proves most valuable, the ability of a corporation to make good on its
promises to pay might prove least likely.
TIPS and Inflation
TIPS produce the perfect hedge against inflation, because bond-payment
mathematics dictate direct correspondence between returns and changes in
inflation rates. The combination of the default-free character of full-faith-
and-credit obligations of the U.S. government and the mathematically
certain protection against inflation provide investors with a powerful
portfolio tool.
Alignment of Interests
TIPS share with standard-issue Treasury offerings a balance in alignment of
interests between creditor and debtor. Unlike relationships between private
borrowers and lenders, in which the borrower seeks gains at the lender’s
expense, the government attempts to fashion a fair deal for parties on both
sides of the borrowing transaction.


=== PAGE 245 ===
In promoting TIPS, the Department of the Treasury highlights
advantages to both the creditor and the debtor. From the creditor’s
perspective, TIPS “provide a distinctive contribution to any diversified
portfolio.” From the debtor’s perspective, TIPS “allow Treasury to broaden
its investor base and diversify its funding risks.”6 The evenhanded approach
to debtor and creditor separates the U.S. government from profit-seeking
private-sector borrowers.
Market Characteristics
At December 31, 2006, outstanding issues of TIPS amounted to only $369
billion. First issued by the U.S. Treasury in January 1997, the program
provides a valuable, diversifying alternative for investors. At year-end
2006, TIPS promised a real (after-inflation) yield of 2.4 percent with an
average maturity of 9.6 years and a duration of 6.4 years.
Summary
Although TIPS amount to only around 17 percent of the value of standard
Treasury bonds, inflation-sensitive TIPS constitute a compelling addition to
the tool set available to investors. Bolstered by the default-free, full-faith-
and-credit backing of the U.S. government, TIPS serve as a benchmark
against which to measure other inflation-sensitive investments.
Real Estate
Investments in real estate provide investors with exposure to the benefits
and risks of owning office properties, apartment complexes, industrial
warehouses, and retail establishments. High quality real estate holdings
produce significant levels of current cash flow generated by long-term, in-
place lease arrangements with creditworthy tenants. Properties that produce
sustained levels of high cash flow exhibit stable valuations, as a substantial
portion of asset value stems from relatively predictable cash flows. In
contrast, properties that produce uncertain cash flows, as in the case where
leases approach expiration and owners face re-leasing risk, show near-term
variability in residual value. In the extreme case of properties that produce


=== PAGE 246 ===
no cash flow, real estate takes on a speculative aura as valuation depends
entirely on prospective leasing activity.
Real estate assets combine characteristics of fixed income and equity.
Fixed income attributes stem from the contractual obligation of tenants to
make regular payments as specified in the lease contract between tenant and
landlord. Properties encumbered by long-term lease obligations exhibit
predominantly bond-like qualities. Equity attributes stem from the residual
value associated with leases expected to be executed for currently vacant
space or for anticipated future vacancies. Properties without tenants or with
tenants on short leases exhibit predominantly equity-like qualities.
Archetypal real estate investments consist of well-located, well-leased,
high quality properties that allow investors to anticipate regular receipt of
rental income from leased space and to expect income within a reasonable
time frame from vacant space. Real estate with a significant operating
component fails to meet the set of core investment criteria, as the
operational attributes largely determine the investment outcome, creating an
equity-like investment play. Core investments do not include raw land,
ground-up development activity and hotel operations, primarily because
these investments rely substantially on operating expertise to produce cash
flows.
Risk and Return Characteristics
Real estate returns and risks fall between those of bonds and equities. With
bond-like rental streams and equity-like residual values, investors expect
real estate to produce results somewhere between the results of the bond
market and the stock market. Ibbotson Associates data for the past eighty
years indicate that stocks returned 10.4 percent annually and government
bonds 5.4 percent annually. Splitting the difference suggests that real estate
investors might realistically expect returns in the neighborhood of 2.5
percent per annum above bonds.
Nearly two decades of data confirm the notion that real estate returns
fall between stocks and bonds. Returns covering 1987 to 2006 for a broad-
based index of real estate holdings stand at 8.4 percent per annum, poised
between the 11.8 percent per annum return for the S&P 500 and the 6.5
percent per annum return for intermediate-term U.S. Treasury bonds.7


=== PAGE 247 ===
Capital markets history confirms expectations regarding relative returns for
real estate.
Valuation of real estate poses less of a challenge than does valuation of
many other risky assets. Consider the fact that, with markets in equilibrium,
replacement cost for existing assets constitutes an important determinant of
market value. In fact, the real estate market provides a powerful example of
the efficacy of Tobin’s “q,” the ratio between market value and replacement
cost of an asset. If the market value of a particular real estate asset exceeds
replacement cost, nearby real estate development of a similar product type
makes economic sense. Clearly, under such circumstances, the income yield
expressed as a percentage of cost of a newly constructed building would
exceed the income yield on the more highly valued existing asset, creating
incentives to build new, high-yielding buildings. Conversely, if replacement
cost exceeds market value, real estate development makes no economic
sense. In such a situation, the income yield on cost falls short of the income
yield on less highly valued existing assets. Instead of building new
buildings, rational market participants buy existing properties, thereby
driving market values toward replacement cost.
Tobin’s “q” proves particularly useful in the real estate market, because
replacement cost constitutes a readily determinable, easily observable
variable. While in the stock market Tobin’s “q” produces insight into
valuation of individual companies, broad market sectors, and even the
entire equity market, the challenges of determining replacement cost of
today’s complex, far-flung corporate entities proves daunting. In contrast,
assessing the cost of constructing a suburban retail mall or a downtown
office building proves far more manageable. In fact, many knowledgeable
investors assess an asset’s cost of replication and then use discount to
replacement cost as an important investment criterion when making real
estate acquisitions.
Public versus Private Holdings
Real estate investments hold the unusual distinction of offering large
numbers of investment vehicles in both publicly traded and privately held
categories. The distinction between public and private positions in real
estate lies in form, not substance. Both public and private holdings of real


=== PAGE 248 ===
estate assets expose investors to the benefits and perils of property
positions.
Many investors in real estate benefit from an unusual investment
vehicle, the real estate investment trust, or REIT. A REIT, unlike a typical
corporate entity, pays no income taxes as long as the REIT distributes at
least 90 percent of its taxable income and generates at least 75 percent of
that income from rents, mortgages, and sales of property.8 REITs serve as a
pass-through structure in which income passes through the security, without
being taxed, to the security holders who take responsibility for the tax
liability, if any. REITs exist in both publicly traded and privately held
forms.
Even though both publicly traded and privately held real estate vehicles
expose investors to real estate assets, public-market securities frequently
trade at prices that deviate from fair value. Green Street Advisors, a highly
regarded research firm that concentrates on publicly traded real estate
securities, routinely examines discrepancies between market price and fair
value. The results give short-term investors pause. At one point in 1990, by
Green Street’s estimate, real estate securities traded at more than a 36
percent discount to fair value. By 1993, the stock market reversed itself,
valuing real-estate-related holdings at a 28 percent premium to fair value.
The yin and yang continued. In late 1994, the discount reached 9 percent,
while in 1997, stock market investors paid more than a 33 percent premium
to fair value. In the late 1990s, a poor market for real estate securities (that
coincided with a wonderful market for most other securities) brought
valuations to a deficit of more than 20 percent, a level reached in early
2000. As the non-real-estate portion of the stock market entered bear
territory, real estate securities took on bullish characteristics, leading to a
greater-than-22-percent premium to fair value in early 2004. At year-end
2006, security prices stood at a not-too-hot and not-too-cold 2 percent
premium over fair value.9 The wide swings between price and fair value in
the public securities arena produced low correlation between returns of
publicly traded and privately held real estate assets.10
Discrepancies between price and fair value disturb careless short-term
players, because any premium paid on purchases and any deficit incurred
on sales loom large in damaging holding-period returns. For canny


=== PAGE 249 ===
investors, deviations between price and fair value allow purchases at a
discount and sales at a premium, buying low and selling high to enhance
portfolio returns. Longer term investors face fewer issues regarding
differences between price and fair value, because over longer investment
horizons the short-term noise in the price/fair-value relationship matters
less. Careful investors either exploit price/fair-value differences or employ
dollar-cost averaging to enter and exit markets that deviate measurably from
fair value.
Although exceptions exist, publicly traded real estate securities
generally provide reasonably low-cost exposure to relatively high quaility
pools of real estate assets. Discrepancies between market price and fair
value create opportunities for investors to build portfolios using relatively
attractively priced assets. When REITs fall from favor, research analysts
explain why the publicly traded shares deserve a permanent discount to
privately held assets, with justifications ranging from illiquidity,
management ineptitude, and high overhead costs, to the inflexibility of
REIT structures. When REITs ride high, the same analysts argue that public
vehicles command a premium for good reasons, including liquidity,
management expertise, economies of scale, and advantages of the REIT
format. Regardless of the idea of the moment, sensible investors favor
REITs when portfolios trade at a discount to private market value and avoid
REITs when shares trade at a premium.
Active Management
Inefficiencies in the pricing and operation of real estate assets create
opportunity for active management. Investors increase return and lower risk
by exercising careful judgment in selecting assets and by using diligence in
managing properties.
Real estate lends itself to active management because mispricings create
opportunities for nimble investors to take advantage of market anomalies.
The task of identifying underpriced and overpriced properties poses
surmountable hurdles, since valuations depend largely on readily observed
variables. Calculation of replacement cost for an asset provides important
information on the value of a well-located property. Information on leases
in place, combined with projections of future lease rates and an estimate of


=== PAGE 250 ===
residual value, produce an easily analyzed stream of cash flows. Sales of
comparable properties provide hard numbers reflecting the willingness of
investors to pay for bricks and mortar or a stream of expected cash flows.
Active management decisions for real estate rest on the fundamental
characteristics of replacement cost, discounted cash flows, and sales of
similar assets, providing clear reference points unavailable for most other
asset types.
 
Sony Building Acquisition Douglas Emmett’s 1993 acquisition of the Sony
Building in Burbank, California illustrates some important valuation tools.
Los Angeles ranked among the hardest hit markets in the real estate debacle
of the early 1990s, with vacancy rates reaching a staggering 24 percent for
Class A office space in the metropolitan market. As a result, prices for
office buildings declined dramatically. In a signature transaction, Sam Zell,
the famed “grave dancer,” bought Two California Plaza for $100 million,
approximately one quarter of what it cost to build a few years earlier.
Nearby Burbank, a distinctly different market with substantially
stronger underlying fundamentals, experienced sympathetic price declines,
suffering by association with Los Angeles. Amid the tumult, as part of a
corporate rationalization program, Coca Cola decided to sell the Burbank
property housing its former subsidiary, Sony Pictures. The sales price of
$83 million compared favorably to the building’s construction cost of more
than $120 million, providing the purchaser a 30 percent discount to
replacement cost.
Cash flow from lease payments further supported the acquisition. One
hundred percent of the space was leased to Sony, at the time a credit rated
single A by Standard & Poor’s. If the investor received only those payments
guaranteed by Sony, all invested capital would be repaid along with
sufficient excess cash flow to generate annual returns of 12.3 percent. This
low double digit return included no estimate of residual value for the
building upon expiration of the lease. With reasonable assumptions
regarding lease renewals and residual value, returns jumped to the 20
percent to 25 percent range. In an interest rate environment where
comparable maturity U.S. Treasury Notes yielded about 6.5 percent, the


=== PAGE 251 ===
relatively high quality Sony payment stream represented a handsome
baseline return for a deal with substantial upside and little downside.
Comparable sales data tell less about the attractiveness of the Sony
acquisition than about the timing. The lack of bids for the Sony Building
and other properties in the area signaled a contrarian opportunity to buy
deeply out-of-favor assets, not a lack of value. Fortified by substantial
discounts to replacement cost and high levels of investment grade cash
flow, investors move forward with confidence in the face of dismal market
conditions. When the tone of the market improves to the point that real
estate players pronounce that asset irreplacability justifies paying a
meaningful premium to replacement cost and that a tight leasing
environment presages transformation of low current cash yields into higher
future cash flows, contrarian investors offer properties for sale.
The striking Sony building, with its handsome tenant finishes, promised
a more-than-satisfactory baseline return with the protection of a purchase
price substantially below replacement cost.* The limited downside of the
Sony Building along with substantial potential upside created a positively
skewed distribution of outcomes, providing extremely attractive investment
characteristics.
In fact, the Sony Building’s appealing acquisition characteristics
translated into an equally appealing investment outcome. When Douglas
Emmett converted the firm’s pool of real estate assets into a REIT in
October 2006, each of the assets received a third party appraisal to support
the valuation and allocation of REIT shares. Based on the appraised value,
the Sony building (now called Studio Plaza) generated a holding period
return in excess of 20 percent per annum. Ultimately, Douglas Emmett’s
investors reaped rich rewards for the firm’s contrarian instincts and real
estate management expertise.
 
Manager Specialization Investors generally benefit from engaging
specialists to manage a fund’s commitment to real estate. Experts in a
particular geography and a particular property type—office, retail,
residential, industrial—enjoy a substantial edge over generalist managers,
who suffer from spreading resources an inch deep and a mile wide.


=== PAGE 252 ===
Specialization leads to greater understanding of the particular dynamics of
different markets, allowing one manager to focus on the relatively static
mass of central business district office buildings and another manager to
focus on the ever-changing inventory of suburban office properties.
Similarly, one manager might specialize in massive department store
anchored malls and another might specialize in smaller infill community
retail centers. By concentrating management resources on a fairly narrowly
defined market segment, fund managers make better buys, better sales, and
better day-to-day asset management decisions.
Investors choosing to select a group of valuation-driven specialist
managers create more powerful portfolios, albeit at the price of a loss of
diversification. By pursuing attractive investment opportunities, selected on
a bottom-up basis, funds develop concentrations in the most out-of-favor
asset types. For instance, prompted by relative valuations, investors may at
times hold outsized positions in California retail properties or Southeastern
suburban office buildings, creating a profile with dramatic deviations from
the characteristics of any broad-based real estate index. Even though
idiosyncratic portfolios tend to exhibit substantial tracking error relative to
the market, a carefully chosen group of niche managers contains the
potential to produce outstanding investment results.
Real Estate Prices and Inflation
The strong relationship between replacement cost and market value leads to
one of real estate’s most attractive investment attributes, a high correlation
with inflation. Since the labor and materials used to construct buildings rise
in cost along with inflation, the replacement cost of real estate tracks
inflation closely. Yet even though replacement cost responds to changes in
the general price level, the nature of an asset’s lease structure influences the
rate of response of changes in market value to inflationary pressures. For
example, a property subject to long-term, fixed-rate leases shows little near-
term correlation to inflation. Only as lease expiration nears will inflation
influence asset valuation. Alternatively, properties with shorter-term leases
exhibit much greater inflation sensitivity. Moreover, some leases explicitly
allow landlords to pass through inflationary increases in expenses or, in the
case of retail properties, contractually entitle landlords to receive a


=== PAGE 253 ===
percentage of sales. Such inflation-responsive lease structures cause asset
values to reflect inflationary moves.
The importance of replacement cost both in valuation analysis and in
inflation sensitivity relies on markets reflecting reasonable equilibrium
between supply and demand. In cases where supply of real estate space fails
to match demand, prices respond to the disequilibrium, not to the expected
relationship with replacement cost or with inflation. In the late 1980s,
investor enthusiasm for owning commercial real estate and federal tax
incentives for developing properties combined to create a vast oversupply
of commercial office buildings. The excesses in the real estate market
contributed to the savings and loan crisis, as many thrifts suffered from the
burden of underperforming or non-performing real estate loans. High
quality, albeit poorly leased, properties traded at steep discounts to
replacement cost. Prices responded to the disconnect between supply and
demand, failing to track inflation. Similarly, in the early 2000s, a post-
Internet-bubble decline in demand for office space led to widespread
vacancies and a decline in real estate prices, resulting in a disequilibrium
that decoupled falling real estate prices from consistently positive levels of
inflation. Unless markets operate in reasonable equilibrium, the relationship
between real estate prices and inflation breaks down. Yet when markets
exhibit equilibrium, sensitivity to changes in the general price level
represents a particularly attractive characteristic of real estate.
Alignment of Interests
In the realm of publicly traded REITs, investors face the same set of
questions about alignment of interests that apply to other publicly traded
equities. Just as in the broader universe of marketable stocks, interests of
shareholders and managements generally, but imperfectly, coincide.
In the world of private real estate vehicles, investors face a range of
investment structures. On one end of the continuum, high quality managers
receive budgeted fees that reflect reasonable costs of running an investment
firm, receive profits interests only on returns in excess of the opportunity
cost of capital, and invest substantial assets side-by-side with investors. On
the other end of the continuum, low quality managers charge high fees on


=== PAGE 254 ===
large pools of assets, extract profits interests on returns in excess of investor
capital contributions and invest O.P.M., other people’s money.
Market Characteristics
Real estate investors face significant investment opportunities in both
public and private markets. At December 31, 2006, the National
Association of Real Estate Investment Trusts tracked a universe of real
estate securities that totaled $436 billion. The REIT population posted a
dividend yield of 3.3 percent and traded at a 2.2 percent premium over fair
value.
At December 31, 2006, the NCREIF National Property Index included
unleveraged real estate assets valued at an aggregate of $247 billion. The
privately held real estate cohort paid a dividend yield of 6.2 percent, which
represented a premium 1.5 percent over the ten-year U.S. Treasury yield.
Summary
In terms of risk and return, real estate falls between higher risk equity and
lower risk debt. The hybrid nature of the expected investment
characteristics matches the hybrid nature of the fundamental traits of real
estate investments. With its inflation-sensitive nature, real estate provides
powerful diversification to investor portfolios.
Real estate investors enjoy the opportunity to choose between publicly
traded and privately held investment vehicles. While sensible alternatives
exist in both public and private forms, careful investors pay close attention
to fee arrangements and look hard at manager quality.
Oil and Gas
Oil and gas investments provide claims on future streams of inflation-
sensitive income, supplying protection against unanticipated inflation and
playing an important role in portfolio diversification. In addition to
furnishing attractive diversifying characteristics, oil and gas assets present
opportunities for superior managers to add value.


=== PAGE 255 ===
Market participants gain exposure to energy assets either by acquiring
futures contracts or by purchasing oil and gas reserves; whether through
futures positions or reserve acquisitions, investors seek price-driven returns.
In order to gain commodity exposure without betting exclusively on prices,
savvy investors structure portfolios around value-added purchases of well-
defined energy reserves operated by superior management teams.
Oil and gas reserve purchases boast a number of advantages over the
simple price exposure provided by futures contracts. First, reserve
acquisitions tend to produce high, equity-like expected returns. Over the
past two decades, well-structured investments in low-risk producing
reserves typically generated low double-digit unleveraged returns, without
considering price movements. Second, superior active managers add value
in the process of acquiring, developing, financing, operating, and
liquidating assets. Expertise and discipline create more value in the
complex physical world of natural resources than in the highly efficient
financial world of commodities markets. Finally, long duration energy
reserves provide a long-term hedge against sustained periods of high energy
prices.
Public versus Private Holdings
Ironically, diversified portfolios of public securities produce less transparent
and less effective exposure to energy prices than do focused private
acquisitions of energy reserves. In the realm of publicly traded energy
companies, investors face questions regarding the degree to which
integrated oil companies consume oil and gas (as inputs to the refining
process, for example) and the degree to which companies produce oil and
gas (as outputs of the exploration process, for example). Even if investors
successfully determine the net corporate exposure to energy prices, the
question of company hedging policies remains. Broadly diversified,
publicly traded companies provide uncertain exposure to energy prices,
leading real assets investors to prefer pure private reserve acquisition plays.
Active Management


=== PAGE 256 ===
Purchases of oil and gas reserves by high quality active managers provide
investors with the opportunity to gain exposure to energy prices and to earn
a significant baseline rate of return. Merit Energy Company, founded in
1989 by Bill Gayden, a former colleague of Ross Perot, successfully
delivered on the twin promises of handsome returns from disciplined
underwriting and substantial portfolio diversification from energy price
exposure.
Merit typically acquires low-risk oil and gas reserves using assumptions
that produce a 12 percent to 14 percent return without assuming energy
price appreciation or depreciation. In a remarkable coincidence between
acquisition assumptions and subsequent reality, from 1990 to 2005, Merit
produced net returns of 19.2 percent per annum, which consisted of 12.2
percent from acquisition economics,2.1 percent from improved operations
and development, and 4.9 percent from price appreciation.
Presumably, investors in energy price futures would have obtained only
the roughly 5 percent per annum price appreciation. Investors in reserve
purchase programs received double-digit returns above and beyond the
price movement, dominating the results of the commodity futures investors.
Energy Prices and Inflation
Energy investments belong in the real assets portfolio because of their
strong correlation with inflation. Energy constitutes roughly nine percent of
the Consumer Price Index (CPI), creating a direct link to inflation.
Unsurprisingly, an Ibbotson Associates study found a positive correlation
between direct energy production investments and CPI, using data for the
period from 1970 to 1998.11 In contrast, Ibbotson found a negative
correlation between direct energy investments and a variety of marketable
securities, including domestic stocks, foreign stocks, Treasury bonds, and
Treasury bills. Both statistics and common sense support the idea of energy
investments as a hedge against inflation.
Alignment of Interests
The old saw—that sensible investors never back an energy partnership
touted on Wall Street, because all the good deals come together in Houston


=== PAGE 257 ===
—contains some truth. Poorly structured oil and gas partnerships abound.
Unscrupulous operators gain advantage over naïve investors by exploiting
the complexities of industry-specific concepts such as net profits interests,
overriding royalty interests, working interests, net revenue interests, and
operating interests. That said, by following sensible deal structuring
principles, including a high level of co-investment by the deal’s promoter,
investors create the opportunity to enjoy the significant benefits of
investments in producing oil and gas reserves.
Market Characteristics
Oil and gas investors confront a broad tableau, including marketable energy
equities of $4.6 trillion, representing 10 percent of global equities as of
December 31, 2006. Institutional private investments amounted to $28
billion on December 31, 2006, according to Cambridge Associates, of
which $20 billion pursued energy reserve purchases.
Summary
Energy investments provide dramatic diversification to institutional
portfolios, as energy prices show negative correlation to traditional
securities over many time periods. Pure price exposure, as obtained through
the purchase of energy futures contracts, comes at a high price in the form
of low expected return. Sensible investors opt for reserve purchase
programs that promise price exposure (along with the accompanying
diversification) and returns in the low double-digit range. Perhaps more
than in any other investment activity, investors must be wary of low quality
operators with opaque, egregious deal structures.
Timber
Timberland offers strong return potential, steady cash flow, inflation
protection, and portfolio diversification. Investment returns stem from
several sources, the most important being the value of timber harvested and
changes in the value of residual timber and land. Timber values, which
relate to the biological growth of trees and changes in timber prices, can be


=== PAGE 258 ===
influenced by sound silvicultural practices. The sale of conservation
easements and land parcels for “higher and better use” (HBU) provide the
potential to boost returns. Finally, incremental revenue can be generated
through other activities, including leasing of land for the exploitation of
mineral deposits, recreational pastimes, and alternative energy uses.
Historically, timber has performed well as an investment, although
accurate data are difficult to obtain. The most frequently cited series, first
created by Hancock Timber Resource Group, combines known timber
prices with assumptions about forest growth and value to generate a
timberland return series beginning in 1960.* Hancock/NCREIF estimates
that U.S. timberland returned 12.7 percent per annum from 1960 through
2005, or roughly 8.1 percent per annum after inflation. Since 1987, the
NCREIF Timberland Property Index produced a cash yield of
approximately 6 percent per annum.
In addition to generating strong returns, timberland provides
diversification relative to securities markets: the Hancock/NCREIF index
exhibited a correlation of -0.17 with the S&P 500. In part, low correlation
stems from the consistent return to timberland from biological growth.
While the S&P 500 produced a calendar loss eleven times since 1960, the
timberland index generated a loss in only one of those eleven years and
losses on only three years overall. Like other real assets, timberland serves
as a hedge against unanticipated inflation. Because timber is a basic
production input for a number of end products, changes in timber prices
correlate strongly with inflation.
Timberland Ownership
The U.S. Forest Service classifies approximately 22 percent of the United
States as timberland, or land capable of producing industrial wood.*
Federal, state, and local governments own nearly 30 percent of U.S.
timberland, with a higher ownership percentage in the Pacific Northwest
and a lower percentage in the South. Nonindustrial users hold
approximately 80 percent of privately owned timberland, much of it not
suitable for institutional investment. The Hancock Group estimates the
investable universe is only 20 percent to 30 percent of nonindustrial private


=== PAGE 259 ===
timberland, with the remainder consisting of small, low quality or poorly
located tracts. Combining industrial timberland with investable
nonindustrial private timberland gives a total U.S. investable timberland
base of approximately $125 billion. By comparison, the value of investable
real estate in the United States is approximately $3.5 trillion.†
In recent years, ownership of timberland in the United States shifted
from forest products companies to institutional investors. At one time,
companies viewed timberland ownership as essential, providing mills with
a captive, dependable source of raw materials. Over time, the inefficiencies
in ownership and management of forestry assets became apparent as trees
were cut without regard to economic value to keep a steady supply of wood
arriving at the mill. Several large companies that separated the mill
operations and timber operations into independent entities saw dramatic
bottom-line improvements in both segments.
Once companies viewed timberland assets as distinct from the core
wood processing business, companies became less attached to holding
massive wood inventories and more focused on the benefits of selling
timberlands. First, timberland sales offered a means of raising capital to
modernize mills, streamline operations, or pay down debt. Second,
timberland sales offered the opportunity to boost stock prices through the
realization of hidden value and by raising returns on capital. Finally, some
companies divested U.S. holdings to move into lower cost, higher
productivity timberlands in other regions of the world.
Over the past decade, approximately 33 million acres of timberland
traded in the United States with annual sales averaging 2.6 percent of the
investable timberland universe. Most timberland on the selling block ended
up in the hands of newly created timberland REITs or newly interested
institutional investors. The new owners often did not own mill assets,
allowing them to focus exclusively on maximizing the value of the
timberlands. As a result, the new owners adopted more sophisticated
financially driven silvicultural techniques, more extensive merchandising
operations, and more aggressive monetization strategies for nontimber
values.
Timber Pricing


=== PAGE 260 ===
As with any other product, the locus of supply and demand drives timber
prices. Local, national, and global dynamics all influence the price a
landowner receives for logs.
At a local level, the supply of timber depends on everything from
weather conditions to the availability of loggers. Timber demand at a local
level derives from mills which purchase delivered logs or buy stumpage
from timberland owners.* Because of the high costs of transporting logs,
proximity to a mill influences the price a timberland owner receives for
logs. Mill closures diminish local demand for logs, pushing prices lower.
On the flip side, new mills and mill modernization programs drive prices
higher.
Ultimately, end product demand supports timber prices. Industries
important to timber demand include construction (both new home
construction and renovations), paper and packaging, and furnishings.
Lumber and wood panel products, for example, which are heavily used in
construction and remodeling make up over 50 percent of U.S. wood product
production. Strong levels of new home construction, home renovations, and
GDP growth translate into strong demand for lumber. The inverse holds
true, as weak end product demand leads to mill closures and weak timber
prices.
Over short time horizons, timber prices experience swings driven by
end product demand cyclicality. Over a longer time horizon, timber prices
benefit from increasing global demand for forest products. However,
secular demand trends for certain products do not support increased demand
for certain types of timber. For example, in recent years, increased use of
electronic media led to reduced growth in demand for paper, paperboard,
and newsprint. However, many other timber end products have less obvious
or cost effective substitutes. Lumber, for example, remains a cheap and
efficient construction material, with no serious substitutes on the horizon.
Differences in end product demand drive variations in prices for
different timber species and grades. Determinants of prices for small, low-
quality trees used for pulp differ from those that influence prices for large,
high quality trees used in furniture production. In addition, changing
technologies create relative price differentials among types of timber. For
example, the development of oriented strand board (OSB), a panel of
