

=== PAGE 381 ===
Generational Transfer
While thoughtful planning by investment management organizations
increases the likelihood of successful transfer of responsibility from one
generation to another, the process poses significant challenges, particularly
for smaller organizations. The idiosyncratic nature of small entrepreneurial
firms causes people to be far less interchangeable than would be the case at
larger bureaucratic money managers. People dominate process at smaller
firms, producing significant uncertainty in the period surrounding the old
guard’s retirement. Transferring responsibility to younger colleagues
inevitably alters the nature of the firm as the new decision makers express
their individual approach to markets. In short, the more attractive the
investment manager, the greater the challenge in passing the baton.
The venture capital community exhibits an unusual number of
entrepreneurial firms that succeed in spanning generations. By transferring
responsibility seamlessly, early market participants Sutter Hill (founded in
1962), Greylock (1965), Sequoia (1972), and Kleiner Perkins (1972) each
created and maintained leading positions in the venture capital community.
As a result of smooth general partner transitions and sustained investment
success, a number of well-established venture firms created franchise value,
favorably positioning the premier partnerships relative to the rest of the
venture community. Outside of the private equity world, few examples exist
of small entrepreneurial investment firms retaining their character through
several generations of control. Some grow large, abandoning investment
goals to focus on asset gathering. Others, dependent on one or two
individuals, fade away with diminished participation from those who drove
the investment process. Perhaps firms built on the idiosyncratic brilliance of
a successful investor stand little chance of transmitting essential skills to
younger associates. In any event, assessing the energy, commitment, and
enthusiasm of the individuals responsible for managing assets takes priority
in monitoring relationships.
Firm Independence
The sale of an investment management firm requires immediate action. In a
small, independent partnership, economic fortunes of the principals


=== PAGE 382 ===
correspond directly to the success of the firm. The rewards associated with
strong performance, and the penalties related to poor results, accrue to the
decision makers. Sales alter the equation dramatically.
After the sale, external owners prefer retaining assets by moderating
investment bets, increasing net client cash flow by enhancing marketing
activities, and diversifying revenues by expanding product offerings. On top
of concerns regarding changes in corporate strategy, the degree of
commitment of investment professionals frequently wanes. Selling
shareholders retire to focus on other interests. The most talented young
people leave to pursue opportunities to create wealth, following in the
footsteps of their now retired mentors. Those who remain tend to be less
adept with fewer alternatives. No advantage accrues to clients from a sale.
Senior partners of successful independent investment managers face a
dilemma. On the positive side of the ledger, the sale of a firm produces a
handsome payday for the equity owners who walk away from the
transaction with a small fortune. On the negative side, the sale sows the
seeds of the firm’s denouement.
By not selling the firm, senior partners fail to maximize the value of
their stake. In what amounts to an act of noblesse oblige, younger principals
receive equity interests for less than true economic value, creating the
potential for the firm to continue as an independent entity. No guarantee of
longevity exists, however, as the new owners now face the same dilemma
their erstwhile senior partners did.
Investment Approach
Changes in investment approach raise yellow flags for fiduciaries. Increases
in assets under management commonly alter investment methods. As assets
increase, small-capitalization stock managers purchase more and larger
securities, increasing diversification and becoming less small-capitalization-
stock oriented. Some hedge funds, beginning as focused stock pickers,
evolve into shops making macro bets, as increases in size dictate playing in
broad, deep, and liquid markets.
Managers of all stripes face the temptation to become closet indexers.
Running a market-like portfolio guarantees market-like results, reducing the
likelihood of being fired for poor performance. When deep value managers


=== PAGE 383 ===
report positions in growth companies, alert fiduciaries pose skeptical
questions.
Disappointing results sometimes lead managers to alter approaches to
portfolio management. Investment advisors may take greater risk, hoping to
hit the long ball to recoup earlier losses. At the extreme, pursuit of risk to
remedy past losses exposes assets to significant future losses as managers
speculate in a desperate attempt to recover assets.
Poor results occasionally cause investors to undergo radical change,
leading to bizarre transformations. The Feshbach brothers, Matt, Joe, and
Kurt, developed a high profile in the 1980s based on impressive investment
returns and controversial short-selling techniques. Using L. Ron Hubbard’s
Theory of Dianetics as an integral part of their investment strategy, the
Feshbach brothers focused on identifying overvalued companies headed for
a tumble. Using traditional securities analysis and private detectives to
uncover fraudulent business practices, the Feshbachs were widely rumored
to “talk down” stocks in their portfolio. Accused of “naked shorting” to
establish illegal short positions when unable to access securities through
legitimate channels, the brothers surrounded themselves with warning
signs. Surprisingly, many investors, including the Frank Russell Trust
Company, ignored the controversy, chased the Feshbachs’ strong
performance numbers, and committed funds to the brothers’ pool, which
peaked at nearly $1 billion in 1990.
In the early 1990s the Feshbach wizardry disappeared, as the strategy of
shorting securities in a bull market produced the nearly inevitable disastrous
results. After a spell of horrendous performance, losing 55 percent of assets
in 1991 alone, the Feshbach brothers reinvented themselves.
In 1993, according to short seller David Rocker, the Feshbachs
“publicly disavowed their short selling activities…to focus on a strategy of
small capitalization growth stocks.”14 The change in strategy, by the
“world’s most notorious short sellers,” akin to switching sides in the middle
of a battle, attracted more interest in the press than with investors. By 1998,
the firm managed $50 million, primarily in traditional long strategies,
representing less than 5 percent of peak assets under management.
Apparently, the passage of time did little to improve the Feshbach fortunes.
A search of investment manager databases turned up very little beyond an


=== PAGE 384 ===
SEC Form 13-F for Matt Feshbach’s MLF Investments. The December 31,
2007 filing reported less than $60 million of positions.
Not all changes in approach bode ill for portfolio managers. For
instance, a manager with a narrowly focused opportunity set rides the
investment roller coaster, rising when opportunity abounds and plunging
when deals dry up. Sensible managers adapt, altering strategy to exploit the
full range of opportunities within the advisor’s area of competence. Many
absolute return managers began their businesses by focusing exclusively on
merger arbitrage transactions. Recognizing the complementary analytical
and legal skills required to assess reorganizations and bankruptcies, some
firms started pursuing investments in the realm of distressed securities. By
adding a fundamentally related activity, managers created a powerful tool
for portfolio improvement. When merger and acquisition activity proceeded
apace, portfolios held significant positions in risk arbitrage. In less robust
economic times, when workouts and defaults littered the investment
landscape, firms increased exposure to distressed investments. In contrast to
investors expert in only one discipline, managers with more than one arrow
in the quiver enjoy the opportunity to mitigate the cyclicality inherent in
market activity.
Gradual, incremental changes in investment approach sensibly expand
the scope of activity without abandoning the base upon which the firm’s
success rests. Natural, evolutionary improvement creates potential for
enhancing portfolio results, benefiting external advisor and client alike.
Fundamental change poses danger to client assets, demanding a dramatic
response by fiduciaries.
Client Meetings
Regular face-to-face meetings between investment advisors and clients
constitute the most important tool for relationship management. Meetings
allow challenges to existing processes and exploration of new ideas. Frank
discussion of advisor and client concerns contributes to early resolution of
problems. While letters and phone conversations provide important input,
nothing matches the benefits of sitting down with an investment manager
for an in-depth review of portfolio activities.


=== PAGE 385 ===
Client responsibilities include being inquisitive without being intrusive.
Respecting the boundary between advisor and client requires avoiding
behavior that makes investment decisions difficult. Pushing advisors to take
positions or discouraging specific investments crosses the line. Challenging
a manager’s thought process or encouraging a contrarian play contributes to
successful relationships.
Investment advisor responsibilities include openness and honesty
regarding portfolio activity. Complete transparency in portfolio matters
provides an essential foundation for client understanding of the investment
process. Occasionally, investment managers refuse to identify positions,
expressing concerns regarding public disclosure on ability to manage a
position. If a manager refuses to trust a client (or potential client) with
portfolio information, the client should not entrust the manager with a
portfolio. Advisors benefit from better-informed clients who tend to remain
faithful during stretches of poor performance and facilitate sometimes
difficult contrarian strategies.
Openness regarding business issues allows advisor and client to
understand the present and to anticipate the future. Many business issues
shape the character of a money management firm. Compensation practices
influence motivation and retention of investment professionals. Succession
planning tells as much about the character of the current generation as it
does about the next. Firms that engage clients in discussion regarding
sensitive business issues face stronger prospects of overcoming the
difficulties inherent in running an investment management operation.
Continuing due diligence checks on investment advisors contributes to
effective relationship management. Alert fiduciaries take advantage of
opportunities to discuss with third parties the business approach and ethical
standards of existing managers, always attempting to gain insight into
external advisor characteristics. While less formal than the round of
reference checks undertaken before hiring a manager, ongoing due
diligence provides important insight into external advisor activities.
Regular interaction between client and advisor constitutes the most
important tool for relationship management, providing ongoing input for
qualitative assessment of manager activity. Constant reevaluation of the
investment rationale contributes to effective oversight of external money


=== PAGE 386 ===
managers, causing fiduciaries to maintain an attitude of healthy skepticism
regarding active management activities.
Qualitative assessments of people, strategy, and structure lie at the core
of relationship management. Sensible fiduciaries regularly revisit the
premises upon which original hiring decisions rest, reviewing initial
assumptions and subsequent behavior. Changes in an investment advisory
firm’s circumstances require particularly careful evaluation, causing
prudent clients to underwrite once again the advisor’s suitability.
Quantitative Factors
Beating the market, as described by a fair benchmark, constitutes the
foremost objective of an investment manager. Mature, liquid marketplaces
offer a host of well-structured benchmarks from which to choose. For
example, U.S. equity markets boast a variety of broad-based indices,
including the S&P 500, the Russell 3000, and the Wilshire 5000. The
benchmark represents the passive alternative, a portfolio that faithfully
replicates asset class performance. Active managers attempt to beat the
benchmark, net of fees, in an effort to add value to the portfolio
management process.
In contrast to marketable securities, illiquid assets have less-well-
defined, market-related, performance measurement benchmarks. Private
investments come from a wide variety of sources, ranging from divisions of
publicly traded companies to family-owned businesses to entities in
bankruptcy. Almost by definition, illiquid assets reside in markets without
benchmarks since an investable benchmark requires well-established, liquid
markets.
Investors pursuing private opportunities employ jerry-rigged bench-
marks, generally using a derivative of a marketable securities metric, either
explicitly as in the S&P 500 plus 500 basis points, or implicitly as in a real
return of 12 percent (based, perhaps, on an expectation of 7 percent real
returns for equities plus a 500 basis point premium).
Fiduciaries articulate a clear benchmark for each manager. In the liquid
markets, a fair benchmark encompasses all investment opportunities from
which an active manager chooses. The more liquid markets provide the best
defined benchmarks, leading to the irony of precise measurement in the


=== PAGE 387 ===
markets least likely to produce something worth measuring. Managers
focusing on specific niches and investors pursuing activities in less efficient
markets present benchmarking challenges. Ultimately, the index against
which fiduciaries assess performance constitutes the manager’s most
important quantitative measure.
Benchmark Specialization
Investment consultants create and monitor an impressive number of
specialized benchmarks, providing apparently precise tools to measure
performance of a broad range of strategies and substrategies. Ranging from
a reasonably standard matrix of style and capitalization indices to a
somewhat motley collection of esoteric measures, consultant benchmarks
assess even the most unusual approach to portfolio management.*
Specialized benchmarks occasionally provide valuable insight
unavailable from broader measures of market activity. Consider the 2003
results for managers focusing on small-capitalization stocks. Median returns
of 45.7 percent bested the S&P 500 return by more than 17 percent, on the
surface an excellent result. When compared to a small-capitalization
benchmark, however, the median results fall short of the passive alternative
by 1.5 percent, a far less impressive performance. The use of a specialized
small-capitalization benchmark provides a truer picture of active small-
capitalization manager returns.15 In the world of benchmark comparisons,
apples-to-apples provides more insight than apples-to-pears.
Specialized benchmarks sometimes require careful evaluation. Consider
the results of value investment strategies in the 1990s, a period when value
managers generally failed to exceed returns of a value benchmark. For the
five years ending December 31, 1997, the value benchmark placed in the
second decile of value manager results, an extraordinary showing for a
passive portfolio.16
Why did the value index crush the results of value managers? The value
index, created by a mechanistic screen that selected low price-to-book and
low price-to-earnings ratio stocks, included a number of unattractive,
washed-out companies. Because active managers often avoid obviously
risky, distressed companies, typical active portfolios contain dampened


=== PAGE 388 ===
value characteristics. When value stocks perform well, active managers
frequently fail to match passive results, as markets reward the riskier profile
of the mechanistically chosen portfolio. Only in times of severe market
stress do outcomes favor the higher quality actively managed value
portfolios.
Reasonable fiduciaries compare manager results to appropriate
benchmarks. Examining small-capitalization manager returns relative to the
S&P 500 distorts the story. Comparing value manager results to a broad-
based index obscures the truth. Employing specialized passive benchmarks
provides a richer comparison, allowing more direct evaluation of style-
specific portfolios. When using specialized benchmarks, fair comparisons
require an understanding of the differences in risk profile between the
active portfolio and the benchmark.
Peer Comparisons
Peer comparisons provide another quantitative metric for performance
assessment. While certain asset classes present less than satisfactory passive
benchmarks, nearly every investment category contains a group of
managers among which results can be compared.
Survivorship bias and backfill bias play an important role in peer
comparisons, particularly in less efficient asset classes. Because market-
related benchmarks provide so little short-term guidance for private assets
and absolute return strategies, peer comparisons take on more significance.
Unfortunately, in the absolute return arena, survivorship bias and backfill
bias dramatically influence the composition and character of the peer group.
Private asset peer groups suffer less extreme survivorship and backfill bias.
Risk Adjustment
Adjusting portfolio returns for risk plays at best a supporting role in
performance evaluation. Managers tend to avoid discussing risk, unless
explaining poor relative performance, as in “we did worse than the market,
but we did it with less risk.” Perhaps, the poor picture of risk provided by
quantitative tools justifies the low level of discussion.


=== PAGE 389 ===
Standard deviation of returns, the measure of dispersion most
commonly used to assess risk, fails to capture much of what concerns
fiduciaries. Simply understanding the historical volatility of returns
provides little useful information regarding the efficacy of a particular
investment strategy. The fundamental risk of the underlying investment
matters, not the security price fluctuation. In a world characterized by
excessive price volatility, security prices mask true investment risk. In spite
of its limitations, historical volatility is the most widely employed
quantitative measure of risk.
Nobel laureate William Sharpe developed an analytical tool to assess
the relationship between risk and return. By evaluating returns above (or
below) the risk-free rate, the Sharpe ratio focuses on the generation of
excess returns. Dividing the excess return by the standard deviation of
returns produces a ratio describing the productivity of risk, quantifying the
excess return generated per unit of risk incurred. However, Sharpe’s ratio
suffers from the same obvious shortcomings as do other measures of
historical volatility.
The American Government Securities Fund
Consider the results of the Piper Jaffrey American Government Securities
Fund (AGF), a mortgage bond investment vehicle, for the five years ending
December 31, 1993. As shown in Table 10.1, AGF returned 19.3 percent
per annum, representing a 13.7 percent annual premium over Treasury bills.
Since volatility of 8.8 percent accompanied the excess return, AGF
delivered a Sharpe ratio of 1.6 units of return for each unit of risk assumed.
From an investment perspective, AGF’s 19.3 percent return appears at
first glance to overshadow the 11.2 percent return of the Salomon Brothers
Mortgage Index. However, because the mortgage index produced excess
returns of 5.5 percent with substantially lower volatility than AGF, the bond
fund and the index sport nearly identical Sharpe ratios for the period. In
other words, AGF’s higher returns appear to stem from accepting higher
risk, not from generating superior risk-adjusted returns. Sharpe’s ratio levels
the playing field.
Even though the Sharpe ratio illuminates historical relationships
between risk and return, backward-looking quantitative measures fail to


=== PAGE 390 ===
capture fundamental risk factors other than those in the numbers. When the
future differs in material ways from the past, investment choices based on
quantitative analysis frequently disappoint investors.
Table 10.1 Alternative Bond Fund Characteristics
Mortgage-Backed Security Returns, 1989–1995
The 1994 bond market debacle crushed the Piper Jaffrey AGF mortgage
fund, causing losses of nearly 29 percent with a risk level of nearly 15
percent. The Salomon Brothers Mortgage Index fared somewhat better, as
returns of -1.4 percent came with a risk level of 4.0 percent. AGF’s Sharpe
ratio of -2.2 for 1994 indicates risk-adjusted performance dramatically
inferior to the index with its ratio of -1.4.
Quantitative characteristics of AGF’s mortgage strategy change
dramatically as the trailing five-year assessment period moves forward to
include 1994. By including 1994’s poor performance and volatility, returns
drop from 19.3 percent for the five years ending December 31, 1993 to 8.5
percent for the five years ending December 31, 1994, even as volatility


=== PAGE 391 ===
increases from 8.8 percent to 12.3 percent. Suddenly the double-digit return
with single-digit risk becomes a single-digit return with double-digit risk.
The Sharpe ratio story reads even worse. Annualized returns for AGF of
8.5 percent over the five-year period ending December 31, 1994 generate
excess returns of 3.7 percent at a risk level of 12.3 percent. The resulting
Sharpe ratio of 0.3 compares unfavorably to the ratio of 1.6 for the five
years ending December 31, 1993. Even though the investment strategy
remained firmly in place, market conditions caused what appeared to be a
reasonably efficient, high-risk strategy into a low-return, high-risk
technique.
In contrast, the five-year mortgage index return of 7.8 percent for the
period ending December 31, 1994, along with excess returns of 3.0 percent
and risk of 3.5 percent provides a superior set of characteristics. Although
the risk-adjusted attributes of the mortgage index deteriorate with the
addition of 1994’s data, the index’s Sharpe ratio of 0.9 indicates a material
advantage over AGF’s 0.3 level.
While quantitative risk assessment helps investors take a disciplined,
analytical approach to assessing investment opportunities, the limitations of
backward-looking number crunching become apparent when markets
produce surprises. Based on data for the five years ending December 31,
1993, Piper Jaffrey’s AGF and the Salomon Mortgage Index garnered
identical Sharpe ratios, indicating roughly equivalent efficacy in translating
risk into excess return. Moving forward one year makes the turtle-like index
appear much more attractive than the hare-like mortgage fund.
In the case of the Piper Jaffrey mortgage fund, historical return and risk
characteristics point investors toward poor timing decisions. In late 1993,
attracted by high returns and index-like efficiency, investors saw ample
reason to purchase shares of the fund. In late 1994, disappointed by terrible
returns and poor relative efficiency, investors found clear justification to
sell shares. Of course, in 1995, in spite of poor trailing five-year
quantitative characteristics, the fund returned 25.9 percent, vastly exceeding
the index returns and matching the index delivery of excess return per unit
of risk.
The only defense against chasing the excellent 1993 numbers and
avoiding the dismal 1994 returns lies in fundamental understanding of the
nature of the investment activity producing the results. Investors making


=== PAGE 392 ===
decisions based only on historical numbers focus exclusively on what has
been, ignoring what will be. While looking into the future poses challenges
fraught with peril, investors armed with a thorough grasp of the forces
driving valuations face a higher probability of success. At the very least,
investors cognizant of the nature of AGF’s mortgage portfolio recognized
the contribution of leverage to 1993’s strong performance and considered
the danger of an extreme reversal in a 1994 type of environment.
Risk adjustment matters. Unfortunately, reducing risk assessment to a
single statistical measure fails to capture the essence of the concept. Prudent
investors employ risk measure with care, supplementing the science with
careful interpretation.
Rates of Return
The most basic financial tools measure returns either weighted by dollars or
linked across time. Dollar-weighted returns, or internal rates of return
(IRR), assess results considering the magnitude and timing of dollars
invested. IRR calculations best measure returns for investment managers
that control cash flow decisions, such as private equity investors who
determine when and how much to invest in particular opportunities.
Time-linked returns derive from a series of periodic returns, without
considering portfolio size at any point in time. Time-linked returns best
measure results for managers that do not control cash flow decisions, such
as marketable securities managers that accept contributions and
withdrawals based on client decisions.
Barr Rosenberg’s Value Added
Rosenberg Institutional Equity Management’s (RIEM’s) core equity product
provides an interesting example of differences in dollar-weighted and time-
weighted returns. As illustrated in Table 10.2 RIEM began corporate life
with extremely strong returns on relatively small amounts of money.
Following a pattern typical in the investment management industry,
impressive results attracted large new accounts, with assets peaking at more
than $8,100 million in 1990. As asset size created a headwind or as good


=== PAGE 393 ===
fortune dissipated, poor investment performance followed, exposing large
amounts of money to substandard management.
Over the firm’s roller-coaster history, time-linked investment
performance remained consistently positive. For the twelve years ending
December 31, 1997, RIEM’s core equity portfolio returned 17.3 percent per
year, eking out a 30 basis point advantage relative to the S&P 500.
Dollar-weighted returns tell a less inspiring story. IRR calculations
show a return of 11.8 percent per annum. Had RIEM’s cash flows been
invested in the S&P 500, the resulting IRR would have been 13.1 percent
per annum. Over the life of the core portfolio, REIM’s clients lost 1.3
percent annually relative to the market, translating into approximately $500
million of opportunity costs.
Table 10.2 Rosenberg Fails to Deliver Value to Clients
Portfolio Returns and Value Added, 1985–1997
Source: Nelson’s Directory
of Investment Managers,
1985–1997.
Date (Year End)
Core Equity
Assets
(millions)
Excess Return
(RIEM Return—
S&P 500 Return)
Value
Added
(millions)
1985
$188
6.2%
$12
1986
1,037
-0.4
-4
1987
2,037
6.6
134
1988
4,222
-0.6
-23
1989
8,020
-4.8
-386
1990
8,157
-3.7
-304
1991
6,608
-0.8
-52
1992
3,692
3.9
143
1993
3,692
1.1
42


=== PAGE 394 ===
Source: Nelson’s Directory
of Investment Managers,
1985–1997.
1994
1,838
-1.0
-19
1995
2,225
0.8
17
1996
2,023
-2.9
-58
1997
1,644
1.2
20
In evaluating marketable security performance, both time-linked and
dollar-weighted returns prove helpful. Time-linked returns provide evidence
regarding a manager’s investment acumen. Dollar-weighted returns shed
light on cash flow timing decisions made by investors. When evaluating
private investment performance, dollar-weighted returns provide the most
appropriate measurement tool, as private investors control cash flow
decisions.
Successful portfolio management combines art and science, requiring
qualitative and quantitative assessment of investment strategies. While
quantitative measures provide essential data for decision makers, reasonable
fiduciaries guard against placing too much emphasis on easily quantified
factors at the expense of less easily measured qualitative factors. Successful
relationship management demands placing soft factors in a place of primary
importance. The numbers, while important, play a supporting role.
Use of Performance Assessment
Investors employ performance assessment to hire managers, size accounts,
and fire managers, with the choice of time frame providing a critical
variable in the evaluation process. Thoughtful use of performance data
creates opportunities to add substantial incremental returns, while
misdirected actions readily destroy value.
The appropriate time frame for performance assessment depends on the
asset class involved and management style employed. Feedback
mechanisms operate over different cycles. Money market investments
provide nearly immediate feedback, as assets mature within a matter of
months, either successfully or not. The short cycle provides fiduciaries with


=== PAGE 395 ===
substantial amounts of round-trip data. Unfortunately, in the highly efficient
money markets, the information generates little opportunity to add value.
Private investing stands at the opposite end of the spectrum. Holding
periods for assets span as much as a decade, forcing fiduciaries to make
manager retention decisions well before meaningful feedback comes from
recent investment activity. The long private investing cycle causes investors
to make decisions based on factors other than near term investment
performance.
Other asset classes fall between the money market and private equity
extremes. The time necessary for feedback mechanisms to operate
corresponds roughly to the manager’s investment horizon. The shorter the
horizon, the shorter the time needed to assess manager skill. In the
marketable securities realm, high turnover indicates a relatively short-term
horizon, suggesting short-term evaluation of the manager’s trades. Consider
the fact that 200 percent turnover corresponds to a six-month average
holding period. In contrast, 20 percent turnover corresponds to a five-year
average holding period. Low turnover strategies deserve longer-term
evaluation, allowing time for the investment manager’s strategy to play out.
In the realm of private investing, time horizons appropriate for manager
evaluation extend much longer.
While portfolio turnover identifies the average holding period for
positions and suggests an appropriate minimum time frame for evaluating
money manager trades, market forces often befog the view of manager
performance. Multiyear moves in the relative attractiveness of small versus
large and value versus growth highlight the importance of employing
appropriate benchmarks and lengthen the time required to assess manager
skill. Serious investors avoid hair trigger decisions, opting instead for
careful, deliberate assessments that span the market cycle appropriate to a
specific manager.
Performance evaluation ultimately determines the fiduciary’s degree of
confidence in an external money manager. Reassessing manager
relationships places investors in an uncomfortable position, as reasonable
investors engage investment advisors with a view toward establishing long-
term relationships. Questioning the validity of the original hiring decision
and examining the continued viability of the investment relationship causes


=== PAGE 396 ===
some measure of cognitive dissonance. Careful fiduciaries seek stable,
long-term arrangements, even while evaluating their dissolution.
The degree of confidence in particular managers influences portfolio
allocations, with high confidence managers receiving greater funding
levels. Periodic reviews of manager account sizes allow portfolios to reflect
opinions regarding relative manager skill levels. Well-considered manager
allocations incorporate factors other than confidence levels, including the
appeal of the manager’s particular strategy as well as the number of
managers available to exploit a specific type of opportunity. That said,
performance evaluation plays a dominant role in determining allocations.
With a clear grasp of a manager’s approach to markets, clients obtain
opportunities to add value through the portfolio rebalancing process. If
manager account sizes generally reflect fiduciary preferences, recent
performance might be used as a secondary indicator for targeting
contributions and withdrawals. Even the most skilled managers experience
periods of underperformance, attributable to positions that, once
established, perform contrary to expectations. If, in the face of poor results,
the original investment case remains intact, adding funds to an out-of-favor
strategy increases exposure to a now even more attractively priced
opportunity. Managers tend to react positively to the vote of confidence
implicit in client cash flows arriving after a period of poor results.
In contrast, following periods of better than expected performance,
thoughtful clients consider reducing account size. Extraordinary
performance likely stems from a combination of manager skill and
fortuitous market conditions. Reducing the account of an outperforming
manager and reallocating funds to weaker performers generally enhances
performance. While managers enjoy receiving cash flow, particularly when
their investment style lacks favor in the marketplace, managers dislike
disgorging funds. Managers frequently blame the market for poor results;
skill completely explains their strong performance.
In any event, reasonable clients avoid costly disruptive cash flow
requests. Withdrawals require particular care, since incurring unnecessary
transactions costs dampens portfolio returns. Contributions to poor
performers and withdrawals from strong performers might be made as part
of a fund’s rebalancing activity, generating only transactions already


=== PAGE 397 ===
required for risk control purposes and facilitating low-cost repositioning of
the portfolio.
Manager Termination
The impetus for manager termination generally falls into one of two broad
categories. First, the initial hiring decision may have been a mistake.
Regardless of the thoroughness of due diligence efforts, the true nature of
an investment relationship emerges only after advisor and client work
together for a period of time. Reexamination of initial assumptions causes
fiduciaries to continue to learn about the manager’s process, either
reinforcing the work that supported the hiring decision or exposing
shortcomings in the original analysis. Second, changes in people,
philosophy, and structure require reassessment of manager relationships.
Significant changes prompt sensible fiduciaries to take a fresh look at the
manager, subjecting the relationship to a thorough reevaluation.
The most difficult part of managing a portfolio of external advisors
involves termination of unsatisfactory relationships. The unpleasant nature
of firing a manager causes many investors to stay with dysfunctional
manager-client relationships far longer than prudent. Rationalizations for
maintaining the status quo abound, providing superficial justification for
avoiding the unpleasant task at hand.
Top-notch fiduciaries approach the manager evaluation task with a cool
analytical mindset that borders on heartlessness. Once investors determine
that mistakes led to the hiring of a manager or changes in circumstance
cause the manager to be unfit, the termination notice must follow. In the
final analysis, careful fiduciaries ask if the manager would be hired today. A
negative answer points to termination.
CONTROL ENVIRONMENT
Back office operations represent a significant, yet often overlooked, source
of risk. Operational controls do not appear on the radar screens of most
institutional fund managers, as investors prefer to deal with the engaging
issues surrounding portfolio management strategies. Fund managers ignore


=== PAGE 398 ===
control environment issues at their peril; a major operational failure moves
internal control issues from an obscure place in the background to an
embarrassing role on center stage.
Endowment fund investors face control risks internally and externally.
Internal control risks consist of exposures created at fund headquarters in
the course of day-to-day portfolio management activities. If all assets were
managed in-house, investors would face only internal control issues.
Conventional audit procedures focus on internal practices, examining the
efficacy and integrity of systems designed to support investment operations.
External control risks consist of exposures created at outside managers.
Traditional audit activities rarely assess directly the control systems of
external investment managers, relying instead on work conducted by other
professional service firms. Since a chain is only as strong as the weakest
link, both internal fund operations and external manager back office
operations require careful examination and oversight.
Inadequate control environments provide fertile breeding grounds for
problems ranging in severity from continual imposition of small costs to
sudden headline-grabbing disasters. Poorly conceived controls expose
investors to the possibility of fraud and malfeasance. Pain avoidance
requires careful planning. Unfortunately, institutions tend to focus on
mundane back office operations only after incurring significant losses.
Investment organizations benefit from regular, independent, intensive
external review of operational practices. For simple portfolio structures,
internal and external auditors provide a comprehensive look at investment
activity, examining relatively basic issues related to safekeeping portfolios
of standard marketable securities. As increasingly sophisticated portfolio
management activities add layers of complexity, generalist auditors face a
dramatically more difficult task. To deal effectively with more complex
investment programs, sensible fiduciaries engage high quality specialists to
assess internal and external practices, providing an important tool for
evaluating an often-ignored aspect of investment management.
A strong audit team from a first-class firm constitutes the first line of
defense against internal control problems. While a thorough audit
represents an important starting point, in today’s investment management
world, routine annual reviews no longer adequately assess portfolio
practices. Occasional, “no holds barred” special audits by a team of experts


=== PAGE 399 ===
provide important strategic insights into risks confronting fund fiduciaries,
allowing remediation of existing issues and mitigation of potential
problems.
Special Audits
Effective special audits engage high quality experts in an unrestricted,
independent review of control practices. By bringing a fresh perspective to
the oversight process, the investigative team causes staff members to revisit
comfortable assumptions regarding internal operations, challenging
individuals to improve existing procedures. Best practices provide a
standard against which to measure current activities and future efforts.
Since 1990, Yale twice employed PricewaterhouseCoopers and once
employed Deloitte & Touche to undertake top-to-bottom examinations of
the university’s investment operations. The first review provided a
substantial amount of useful feedback, highlighting the risks in security
lending activities. Prompted by the PricewaterhouseCoopers report, the
university took a fresh look at the internally managed security loan
program, concluding that structural changes in the market had transformed
a once attractive opportunity into an unattractive risk-reward activity. As a
result, the university discontinued its security lending operations, a move
that appeared prescient when the Common Fund’s security lending debacle
became public sometime later.*
A second special audit of Yale’s investment operations by
PricewaterhouseCoopers concluded that, while industry “best practices”
characterized the university’s monitoring of external manager back offices,
room for improvement existed. Standard industry practice involves
relatively superficial investigation of internal controls at external managers,
if such controls receive any attention at all. Since external manager control
processes contribute to the integrity of the overall control framework within
which the endowment operates, the university’s risk exposure depends on
the quality of these sometimes superficially evaluated manager operations.
PricewaterhouseCoopers concluded that Yale had an opportunity to
redefine industry standards by understanding and improving the financial
control environment, internally and externally. The basic job description


=== PAGE 400 ===
involves evaluating regulatory compliance, internal operations, accounting
and trading systems, legal and auditing professional support, as well as
policies for asset valuation, risk assessment, derivatives, and soft dollars.
Yale’s compliance efforts create opportunities to reduce risk by introducing
superior practices identified at one manager to other managers, thereby
improving control processes across the entire portfolio. Not only does the
university benefit from evidence gathered when examining the control
environment at outside managers, the evaluation process communicates the
importance Yale attaches to strong internal operations. Such attention
prompts managers to focus appropriate levels of time and energy on back
office activities.
CONCLUSION
One of the most important distinctions in the investment management arena
separates those investors with the ability to make high quality active
management decisions from those investors without the resources to make
such decisions. Active management opens up the possibility of employing
asset classes that require superior investment skill—absolute return, private
equity, and real assets. As an added attraction, active management provides
the possibility of producing market-beating results in domestic and foreign
marketable equities. In contrast, without active management skill, prudent
investors limit choices to passively managed marketable security asset
classes. Only foolish investors pursue casual attempts to beat the market, as
such casual attempts provide the fodder for the skilled investors’ market-
beating results.
A disciplined framework for decision making underpins successful
investment operations. Clear definition of the respective roles of staff and
committee ensures that staff members drive the process, while committee
members provide effective oversight. Without a rigorous process, informed
by thorough analysis and implemented with discipline, investment
portfolios tend to follow the whims of fashion. Casually researched,
consensus-oriented investment positions provide little prospect for
producing superior results in the intensely competitive investment
management world.


=== PAGE 401 ===
An effective investment process reduces the inevitable gap between the
goals of the institution and the actions of the portfolio’s stewards. Trustees
strive to make a difference during their tenure, while staff members seek job
security, with both aspirations potentially at odds with long-term
institutional goals. By establishing and maintaining investment operations
as part of the fabric of the institution, fiduciaries increase the likelihood of
placing institutional needs ahead of personal interests.
Intermediaries, such as consultants and funds of funds, add another
layer to the investment process, introducing a dysfunctional filter that
serves to impair returns. Institutions that avoid employing intermediaries
and engage dedicated staff resources stand a far better chance of success.
A sound decision-making process contributes significantly to
investment success, allowing investors to pursue potentially interesting,
long-term contrarian investment positions. By reducing pressures to
perform quarter-to-quarter, liberated managers gain the freedom to create
portfolios positioned to take advantage of opportunities created by short-
term players. An environment that encourages managers to make
potentially embarrassing out-of-favor investments and tolerates the
inevitable missteps increases the likelihood of investment success.
Long-term success requires individualistic contrarian behavior based on
a foundation of sound investment principles. An effective framework
overcomes the handicap of group decision making and promotes well-
considered risk taking. A thoughtful, high quality governance process
serves as an essential underpinning of a successful investment program.
Sensible investors assess investment advisory relationships with a
balance of soft qualitative attributes and hard quantitative characteristics.
Qualitative factors play a central role in manager evaluations, placing
people at the core of portfolio structuring decisions. Critical variables
include the quality of investment professionals, the strength of the
investment philosophy, and the character of the organizational structure.
Regular face-to-face meetings constitute the most important manager
monitoring tool.
Quantitative management tools include return data on individual
portfolios, market benchmarks, and active manager universes. Overreliance
on the neat precision of numerical results frequently leads to poor decisions.
Investors looking only at the numbers face the prospect of buying high and


=== PAGE 402 ===
selling low, making commitments prompted by strong results and
withdrawing funds based on poor performance.
Successful investment programs require open, honest relationships
between institutional clients and external money managers. Direct, frequent
communication allows investors to take advantage of market opportunities.
When declining prices allow purchase of assets on attractive terms, high
quality clients provide incremental funds to exploit the opportunity.
Conversely, thoughtful money managers with relatively few attractive
opportunities return funds to clients. Such activity takes place only when a
high degree of confidence and trust exists between money managers and
clients.
Performance evaluation drives portfolio allocation decisions, as
conclusions regarding manager ability influence the confidence of
fiduciaries. In many respects, the investor faces a binary decision. If
confidence exists, fiduciaries muster the courage necessary to behave in a
contrarian manner, supporting managers experiencing a spell of poor
results. If a fiduciary lacks the confidence to increase exposure to an
underperforming manager, either the manager or the fiduciary should go.
OceanofPDF.com


=== PAGE 403 ===
APPENDIX:
Impure Fixed Income
Fixed income alternatives dominate the population of well-defined markets
that serve no valuable portfolio role. While default-free, noncallable, full-
faith-and-credit obligations of the U.S. government play a basic, valuable,
differentiable role in investor portfolios, investment grade corporate bonds,
high yield bonds, foreign bonds, and asset-backed securities contain
unattractive characteristics that argue against inclusion in well-constructed
portfolios. Noncore fixed income asset classes command a sizable portion
of the pool of investment alternatives. Many players allocate assets to
corporate bonds and mortgage-backed securities, hoping to generate
incremental returns without additional risk. Understanding the
shortcomings of particular fixed income investment alternatives,
particularly in regard to how those alternatives relate to the objectives of the
fixed income asset class, helps investors to make well-informed portfolio
decisions.
DOMESTIC CORPORATE BONDS
Owners of corporate bonds hold a piece of a loan to the corporation that
issued the bonds to borrow the money. In a company’s capital structure,
debt obligations rank higher than equity interests, causing a company’s
bonds to exhibit less fundamental risk than a company’s equity. Because
bonds carry less risk than equities, fixed income investors expect lower
returns than do equity investors. Unfortunately for investors, corporate
bonds contain a variety of unattractive characteristics, including credit risk,
illiquidity, and callability. Even if corporate bond investors receive fair


=== PAGE 404 ===
compensation for these unattractive characteristics, astute investors
recognize that the credit risk and callability of corporate obligations
undermine the fundamental diversifying power expected from fixed income
holdings.
Credit Risk
Credit risk stems from the possibility that a corporation will not meet the
obligation to make full and timely payments on its debt. Rating agencies,
such as Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s Investor Service, publish ratings
for bond issues, purporting to grade the likelihood that an issue will produce
as promised. The most important factors in assessing a bond issuer’s ability
to pay lie in the size of the equity cushion supporting the debt and the
amount of cash flow servicing the debt. Investment grade ratings, assigned
to the most creditworthy borrowers, range from triple A (the highest) to
triple B. High yield or “junk” bonds carry ratings of double B and below.
Lower-rated bonds embody greater credit risk and exhibit more equity-like
characteristics.
Moody’s describes triple-A rated bonds as being “of the best quality”
and carrying “the smallest degree of investment risk,” with interest
payments “protected” and principal “secure.” Double-A bonds exhibit “high
quality by all standards,” while single-A bonds “possess many favorable
investment attributes.” The bottom investment grade category (triple-B)
manifests adequate security “for the present,” but “lacks outstanding
investment characteristics.”1 Despite the shades of gray introduced by the
description of the triple-B rating category, Moody’s paints a bright picture
for investment grade debt obligations.
Unfortunately, from a corporate debt investor’s perspective, triple-A
rated bonds can only decline in credit quality. Sometimes bondholders
experience a downward drift in quality to less exalted, albeit still
investment grade ratings. Other times bondholders face a lengthy, Chinese-
water-torture deterioration in credit that results in exile to the “fallen angel”
realm of the junk bond world. On occasion, triple-A rated obligations
maintain their standing. In no case, however, do triple-A bonds receive
upgrades.


=== PAGE 405 ===
IBM illustrates the problem confronting purchasers of corporate debt.
The company issued no long-term debt until the late 1970s, as prior to that
time IBM consistently generated excess cash. Anticipating a need for
external finance, the company came to market in the fall of 1979 with a $1
billion issue, representing the then-largest-ever corporate borrowing. IBM
obtained a triple-A rating and extremely aggressive pricing on the issue,
which resulted in an inconsequential yield spread over U.S. Treasuries and
(from an investor’s perspective) underpriced call and sinking fund options.
Bond investors spoke of the “scarcity value” of IBM paper, allowing the
company to borrow below U.S. Treasury rates on an option-adjusted basis.
From a credit perspective, IBM debt had nowhere to go but down. Twenty-
eight years later, IBM’s senior paper carried a rating of single A, failing to
justify both the ratings agencies’ initial assessment of IBM’s credit and the
investors’ early enthusiasm for IBM’s bonds.
Bond investors did not face an opportunity to lend to the fast-growing,
cash-generative IBM of the 1960s and 1970s. Instead, bond investors
considered the option of providing funds to the IBM of the 1980s and
1990s, when the company needed enormous sums of cash. As IBM’s
business matured and external financing requirements increased, the quality
of the company’s credit standing slowly eroded.
Contrast the slow erosion of IBM’s credit to instances in which
corporate credit quality declines dramatically. In early April 2002,
WorldCom’s senior debt boasted a single-A rating from Moody’s, placing
the fixed income obligations of the telecommunications company firmly in
the investment grade camp. On April 23rd, Moody’s downgraded
WorldCom to triple B, one notch above junk status, as the company
struggled with lower demand from business customers and concerns
regarding accounting issues. A little more than two weeks later, following
Chief Executive Bernard Ebbers’s resignation, on May 9th Moody’s
chopped WorldCom’s rating to double-B, junk-level status. According to
Bloomberg, the firm thereby achieved the dubious distinction of becoming
the “biggest debtor to ever be cut to junk.”2
To the dismay of WorldCom’s creditors, the rapid fire descent
continued. On June 20th, Moody’s assigned a rating of single B to
WorldCom’s senior debt, citing deferral of interest payments on certain of


=== PAGE 406 ===
the company’s obligations. One week later, Moody’s dropped WorldCom’s
rating to single C, characterized by the rating agency as “speculative in a
high degree.” In the middle of the following month, on July 15th, the
company defaulted on $23 billion worth of bonds. Finally, on July 21st,
WorldCom filed for the largest bankruptcy in history, listing in its court
filing assets in excess of $100 billion.
WorldCom’s transformation from a single-A credit, possessing
“adequate factors giving security to interest and principal,” to a company in
bankruptcy spanned less than three months. Most holders of bonds watched
helplessly as the train wreck of WorldCom’s bankruptcy demolished
billions of dollars of value in what Moody’s described as a “record-breaking
default.”3
During the final stage of the firm’s death spiral, the WorldCom Senior
6.75 Percent Notes of May 2008 fell from a price of 82.34 in the week
before the Moody’s downgrade to a price of 12.50 after the firm’s
bankruptcy. Owners of equity fared worse. From the week before the
downgrade to the date of the bankruptcy, the stock price collapsed from
$5.98 per share to 14 cents per share. Measured from the respective peaks,
equity investors took by far the rougher ride. The WorldCom senior notes
traded as high as 104.07 on January 8, 2002, resulting in an 88.0 percent
loss to the bankruptcy declaration. Stockholders saw a price of $61.99 on
June 21, 1999, creating a high-water mark that allowed investors to lose
99.8 percent to the date of the corporate demise.
Clearly, on a security-specific basis WorldCom’s collapse hurt equity
holders more than it hurt debt holders, consistent with the notion that equity
carries more risk than bonds. Yet, ironically, equity owners likely found it
easier to recover from the WorldCom debacle than bondholders. The key to
this apparent contradiction lies in the superior ability of a portfolio of
equities to absorb the impact of single-security-induced adversity. Because
individual stocks contain the potential to double, triple, quadruple, or more,
a portfolio of equities holds any number of positions that could more than
offset one particular loser. In contrast, high quality bonds provide little
opportunity for substantial appreciation. The left tail of the negatively
skewed distribution of outcomes hurts bond investors in dramatic fashion.


=== PAGE 407 ===
The deterioration in IBM’s ability to pay over nearly three decades and
the much more compressed collapse of WorldCom’s credit standing
mirrored a broader trend in the corporate debt markets. In recent times,
corporate debt downgrades far outnumbered upgrades, forcing bond
investors to manage against substantial headwinds. For the two decades
ending December 31, 2006, Moody’s Investors Service downgraded 6,907
debt issues while the firm upgraded 4,087. In the last decade alone, $7,003
billion of debt deteriorated in quality relative to the $3,931 billion of debt
that improved.4
The across-the-board decline in credit standards stems in part from the
past two decade’s relentless increase in leverage in corporate America. On
June 30, 1987, the debt-equity ratio of S&P 500 companies stood at 0.6,
signaling that the constituent companies of the S&P 500 carried 60 cents of
debt for every dollar of equity. As leverage increased in popularity, on June
30, 1997, the ratio reached 0.90. By June 30, 2007, the S&P 500 posted a
debt-equity ratio of 1.03, indicating that debt levels exceeded the equity
base by three percent. As the level of corporate borrowings increased, the
security of corporate lenders decreased.
Not surprisingly, the increase in debt placed stress on the income
statement. Consider the ratio between the cash flow available to service
debt and a firm’s interest expense. At June 30, 1987, the constituent
companies of the S&P 500 boasted $4.70 of cash flow for every $1.00 of
interest expense. By June 30, 2007, the ratio decreased to $3.80 of cash
flow per $1.00 of interest expense, representing a dramatic impairment.
Obviously, as cash flows decreased relative to fixed charges, the security of
the bondholders decreased commensurately.
Balance sheets and income statements tell the same story. Debt-equity
ratios increased markedly over the past two decades, signaling deterioration
in corporate credit. Cash flow coverage ratios deteriorated significantly
over the same twenty years, suggesting a decline in corporate financial
health. Both factors contribute to rating agency downgrades far
outnumbering upgrades.
In addition to fundamental factors, the particular nature of companies
that issue corporate debt may contribute to the surplus of downgrades over
upgrades. The universe of corporate debt issuers consists of generally


=== PAGE 408 ===
mature companies. Relatively young, faster growing companies tend to be
underrepresented in the ranks of corporate bond issuers, in many cases
because they have no need for external financing. Bond investors cannot
purchase debt of Microsoft, because the company sees no need to tap the
debt markets for funds. Bond investors can purchase debt of Ford Motor
Company, because the firm requires enormous amounts of external finance.
If the group of corporate debt issuers excludes fast-growing, cash-
generative companies and includes more-mature, cash-consuming
companies, perhaps bond investors should expect to see more credit
deterioration than credit improvement. Regardless of the cause, if history
provides a guide to the future, bond investors can expect more bad news
than good on credit conditions.
Liquidity
Liquidity of corporate bond issues pales in comparison to the liquidity of
U.S. Treasuries which trade in the broadest, deepest, most liquid market in
the world. Most corporate issues tend to trade infrequently, as many holders
buy bonds at the initial offering and sock them away, pursuing buy-and-
hold strategies.
Yet bond investors value liquidity highly. Compare U.S. Treasury issues
and Private Export Funding Corporation (PEFCO) bonds. Even though both
bonds enjoy full-faith-and-credit backing of the U.S. government, the less
liquid PEFCO bonds trade at prices that produce yields of as much as 0.6
percent per annum higher than comparable-maturity Treasuries. The
difference in yield stems entirely from the value that the market places on
liquidity. Liquidity of most corporate bonds tends to stand closer to the
PEFCOs than to the Treasuries, suggesting that lack of liquidity explains a
significant portion of the corporate bond yield spread.
Callability
Callability poses a particularly vexing problem for corporate bond
investors. Corporations frequently issue bonds with a call provision,
allowing the issuer to redeem (or call) the bonds after a certain date at a
fixed price. If interest rates decline, companies call existing bonds that bear


=== PAGE 409 ===
higher-than-market rates, refunding the issue at lower rates and generating
debt service savings.
The holder of corporate bonds faces a “heads you win, tails I lose”
situation. If rates decline, the investor loses the now-high-coupon bond
through a call at a fixed price. If rates rise, the investor holds a now-low-
coupon bond that shows mark-to-market losses. The lack of parallelism in a
callable bond’s response to rising and falling rates favors the corporate
issuer over the bond investor.
The asymmetry implicit in the corporate bond call provision prompts
questions regarding relative market power and sophistication. Why do
many bonds incorporate call provisions? Why do put provisions appear
rarely?* Surely, if interest rate increases prompt bond price decreases,
investors would like to put the now-underwater bonds to corporate issuers
at a fixed price. The answer to the asymmetry no doubt lies in the superior
sophistication of issuers of debt relative to the limited market savvy of
purchasers of debt.
In point of fact, fixed income markets attract analysts several notches
below the quality and sophistication of equity analysts, even though the
complexity of the task facing the fixed income analyst arguably exceeds the
difficulty of the equity analyst’s job. Corporate bond investors need
familiarity not only with the complexities of fixed income markets, but also
with the full range of issues involved in equity valuation. Since
understanding the cushion provided by a company’s equity proves essential
in evaluating a corporation’s ability to service debt, bond analysts require a
full assessment of a company’s stock price. Ironically, because financial
rewards for successful equity analysis far outstrip the rewards for successful
fixed income analysis, the talent gravitates to the easier job of simply
analyzing equity securities.
Negatively Skewed Distribution of Outcomes
Atop the perils facing investors in the corporate bond market stands a
further handicap. The expected distribution of corporate bond returns
exhibits a negative skew. The best outcome for holding bonds to maturity
consists of receiving regular payments of interest and return of principal.


=== PAGE 410 ===
The worst outcome represents default without recovery. The asymmetry of
limited upside and substantial downside produces a distribution of
outcomes that contains a disadvantageous bias for investors.
Shorter holding periods manifest the same distributional problem.
Return of principal at maturity (or prematurely upon corporate exercise of a
call provision) limits appreciation potential. The nearer the date of expected
repayment, the greater the dampening effect. In the case of credit
deterioration, bondholders experience an attenuated dampening effect.
When corporate prospects deteriorate, bond prices decline as purchasers
require greater returns for the now-riskier issue. In a worst-case default
scenario, bond investors may face a total wipeout. Both when holding
bonds to maturity and for shorter terms, bond investors deal with a
decidedly unattractive, limited-upside, substantial downside, negatively
skewed distribution of returns.
Investors prefer positively skewed distributions by a wide margin.
Active equity investors prize positions with limited downside, perhaps
supported by readily ascertained asset values, and substantial potential
upside, perhaps driven by anticipated operational improvements. Under
such circumstances, investors see a high likelihood of preserving capital
with a considerable possibility of significant gains. Positively skewed
distributions of expected investment results definitively trump negatively
skewed distributions, creating yet another hurdle for fixed income investors.
Alignment of Interests
Interests of stockholders and bondholders diverge dramatically. Equity
owners benefit by reducing the value of debt obligations. Equity owners
suffer as the cost of debt finance increases. To the extent that corporate
management serves shareholder interests, bondholders beware.
Consider the enterprise value of a corporate entity. Analysts assess
company values by evaluating either the left side or the right side of the
balance sheet. The left side of the balance sheet contains difficult-to-value
physical assets. What price reflects the fair market value of the various and
sundry facilities owned by Ford Motor Company? What value accrues to
Ford from its world famous trademark? Even the most diligent analysts


=== PAGE 411 ===
recoil at the thought of conducting the asset-by-asset inventory required to
value the left side of a company’s balance sheet.
The right side of the balance sheet contains easier-to-value liabilities.
Summing the market value of a company’s debt and the market value of a
company’s equity provides the enterprise value of a corporation. The
enterprise value reflects the price an investor would pay to buy the entire
company. If all equity were purchased at the market price and all debt and
other liabilities were purchased at market prices, the purchaser would own
the entire corporation (debt free!).
From this description of a firm’s debt and equity positions follows the
fundamental corporate finance principle that a firm’s value stands
independent of a firm’s capital structure. Because an investor holds the
power to undo what a firm has done with its capital structure or to do what
a firm has not done with its capital structure, the enterprise value of a
company must be independent of its financing. For example, an investor
might undo a firm’s leverage by purchasing that firm’s bonds, thereby
negating the effect of corporate leverage. Conversely, an investor might
create a leveraged position in a firm by borrowing to buy the firm’s stock,
thereby creating leverage where none existed. Since investors can destroy
or create leverage independent of a company’s actions, the enterprise value
must be independent of the company’s capital structure.*
The description of enterprise value highlights the clear, direct trade-off
between the interests of stockholders and bondholders. The value of the
enterprise lies in the sum of the value of the debt and the value of the
equity. To the extent that owners of a company reduce the value of the
bondholders’ position, the equity owners benefit. Stockholders gain by
imposing losses on bondholders.
Because interests of corporate management align with equity investors,
bondholders find themselves sitting across the table from corporate
management. Recognizing the vulnerability created by relying on corporate
management to protect lender interests, bond investors employ complicated
contracts, called indentures, that seek to cause corporate issuers of debt to
serve bondholder needs. Unfortunately for bondholders, even contracts
drafted by the most able lawyers prove insufficient to influence corporate


=== PAGE 412 ===
behavior in the desired manner, particularly when the hoped-for actions run
against the economic interests of management.
At times, the transfer of wealth from bondholders to stockholders
occurs in dramatic fashion. When companies engage in leveraged buyout or
leveraged recapitalization transactions, the debt levels of the corporations
increase substantially. The increase in debt heightens the risk for existing
lenders, leading directly to a decrease in the value of existing debt
positions. KKR’s 1989 RJR Nabisco buyout exemplifies the pain suffered
by bondholders when debt levels balloon. During the bidding war for RJR,
as the price offered for the company increased to ever-more-absurd levels,
so did the prospective debt burden. Before the buyout, RJR Nabisco’s
liabilities amounted to something less than $12 billion. Post-buyout fixed
obligations exceeded a staggering $35 billion. As a direct result of the
dramatic change in capital structure, pre-buyout bondholders lost an
estimated $1 billion of value while equity owners enjoyed a $10 billion
windfall. The bondholder losses went directly to the equity owners’
pockets.
In other situations, management employs more subtle methods to
disadvantage bondholders. Simply by seeking to borrow at the lowest
possible costs and on the most flexible terms, management acts to lessen the
position of bondholders. Aside from working to achieve low borrowing
rates, bond issuers might include favorably priced call options or
attractively structured sinking fund provisions. Upon exercise of a call
option, bondholders suffer and equity owners gain. Companies may
negotiate indenture terms that grant wide operating latitude for
management, including the flexibility to take actions that impair
bondholders’ interests.
The ultimate check on management’s actions to disadvantage
bondholders comes from a desire to retain access to the debt financing
markets. Repeated, egregious actions that hurt bondholders may lead to a
temporary hiatus in a company’s ability to borrow on favorable terms. Yet
the transactions most likely to raise bondholders’ ire, buyouts and leveraged
recapitalizations, occur infrequently, allowing the market’s memory to fade
before a company needs to borrow again. More subtle actions taken by
management to pick bondholders’ pockets seldom receive much notice. By


=== PAGE 413 ===
taking a seat across the table from corporate management, bondholders
expose their position to potential impairment.
Market Characteristics
At December 31, 2006, the market value of investment-grade corporate
bonds totaled $1.7 trillion. Yield to maturity stood at 5.7 percent, with the
proviso that future changes in credit quality contain the possibility of
decreasing the forecasted yield. Average maturity and duration stood at 10.1
years and 6.1 years, respectively.5
Summary
Many investors purchase corporate bonds, hoping to get something for
nothing by earning an incremental yield over that available from U.S.
Treasury bonds. If investors received a sufficient premium above the
default-free U.S. Treasury rate to compensate for credit risk, illiquidity, and
callability, then corporate bonds might earn a place in investor portfolios.
Unfortunately, under normal circumstances investors receive scant
compensation for the disadvantageous traits of corporate debt. At the end of
the day, excess returns prove illusory as credit risk, illiquidity, and
optionality work against the holder of corporate obligations, providing less
than nothing to the corporate bond investor.
Corporate bond investors find the deck stacked against them as
corporate management’s interests align much more closely with equity
investors’ aspirations than with bond investors’ goals. A further handicap to
bond investors lies in the negative skew of the potential distribution of
outcomes, limiting the upside potential without dampening the downside
possibility.
Safe-haven attributes justify inclusion of fixed income in well-
diversified portfolios. Unfortunately, in times of duress, credit risk and
optionality serve to undermine the ability of corporate bonds to protect
portfolios from the influences of financial crisis or deflation. In troubled
economic times, a corporation’s ability to meet contractual obligations
diminishes, causing bond prices to decline. In declining rate environments,
caused by flight to quality or by deflation, bond call provisions increase in


=== PAGE 414 ===
value, heightening the probability that companies call high-coupon debt
securities away from bondholders. Sensible investors avoid corporate debt,
because credit risk and callability undermine the ability of fixed income
holdings to provide portfolio protection in times of financial or economic
disruption.
Historical returns confirm that investors received insufficient
compensation for the array of risks inherent in corporate debt. For the ten
years ending December 31, 2006, Lehman Brothers reports annualized
returns of 6.0 percent for U.S. Treasury bonds and 6.5 percent for
investment-grade corporate bonds. While index-specific differences in
market characteristics and period-specific influences on market returns
cause the comparison to fall short of a perfect apples-to-apples standard, the
0.5 percent per annum difference between Treasury and corporate returns
fails to compensate corporate bond investors for default risk, illiquidity, and
optionality. U.S. government bonds provide a superior alternative.
HIGH YIELD BONDS
High yield bonds consist of corporate debt obligations that fail to meet blue
chip standards, falling in rating categories below investment grade. The
highest category of junk bonds carries a double-B rating, described by
Moody’s as having “speculative elements,” leading to a future that “cannot
be considered as well assured.” Moving down the ratings rungs, single-B
bonds “lack characteristics of the desirable investment,” triple-C bonds “are
of poor standing,” double-C bonds “are speculative in high degree,” and the
lowest class of bonds (single-C) has “extremely poor prospects of ever
attaining any real investment standing.”6
High yield bonds suffer from a concentrated version of the unattractive
traits of high-grade corporate debt. Credit risk in the junk-bond market far
exceeds risk levels in the investment-grade market. Illiquidity abounds,
with the lowest-rated credits trading by appointment only. Callability poses
the familiar “heads you win, tails I lose” proposition for owners of junk
bonds with an added twist.
Holders of both investment-grade and junk bonds face callability
concerns in declining rate environments. Lower rates prompt refunding


=== PAGE 415 ===
calls in which the issuer pays a fixed price to the bondholders and reissues
debt at lower cost. Holders of high quality paper and junk bonds face
interest-rate-induced refunding risks of similar nature.
Above and beyond the possibility that junk bondholders lose bonds in a
declining rate environment, callability potentially thwarts the junk
bondholder’s ability to benefit from an improving credit. One of the goals
of junk-bond purchasers involves identifying companies that face a brighter
future, leading to greater ability to service debt, improved marks from the
rating agencies, and higher prices in the market. Fixed-price call options
serve to limit the ability of junk-bond investors to benefit from improving
credit fundamentals, marking yet another means by which equity holders
benefit at the expense of bondholders.
Packaging Corporation of America
Consider the fate of investors in Packaging Corporation of America (PCA)
9.625 percent Series B Senior Subordinated Notes of April 1,2009. Issued
by a highly leveraged manufacturer of containerboard and corrugated
cartons, at the initial offering in April 1999, the bonds carried a coupon rate
approximately 500 basis points above comparable maturity Treasury notes
and boasted a rating at the bottom of the single-B category. According to
Moody’s Investors Service, the single-B rating indicated that “[a]ssurance
of interest and principal payments or of maintenance of other terms in the
contract over any long period of time may be small.”7 Purchasers of the
bonds no doubt hoped for a better future, one in which the likelihood of
maintenance of contract terms might be larger rather than smaller. Perhaps
investors foresaw a future characterized by an improvement in corporate
fundamentals, a bull market in bonds, or both.
The PCA 9.625s of April 2009 provided more than $530 million of
proceeds to help finance private-equity-firm Madison Dearborn’s leveraged
buyout of Tenneco’s packaging business. The single-B rating flowed
naturally from the highly leveraged nature of the buyout transaction. At the
time of the bond issuance in the second quarter of 1999, PCA carried net
debt of $1,639 million, representing a borrowing level equal to 4.9 times the
company’s equity base.


=== PAGE 416 ===
In January 2000, PCA floated equity shares in an initial public offering
conducted near the peak of a two-decade-long bull market. Underwritten by
Goldman Sachs, the 46.25 million shares offered at $12 each raised a total
of $555 million in proceeds for the company. As for the bondholders, the
9.625s of April 2009 retained a single-B rating and a price near par.
Shortly after the company’s IPO, the hoped-for improvement in PCA’s
credit picture began. Second quarter 2000 net debt declined to $1,271
million, improving the debt-equity ratio to 2.2. In April 2000, Moody’s
increased the company’s senior subordinated note rating from single B3, the
lowest rung of the single-B category, to single B2, the middle-rung rating.
More good news followed in September 2000, when Moody’s boosted the
rating of the PCA 9.625s of April 2009 to B1, the top of the single-B
category. In a mere eighteen months, the quality of the senior subordinated
securities showed significant improvement.
Positive momentum in PCA’s financial situation continued. By the third
quarter of 2001, the company paid down enough debt to bring outstanding
borrowings to $751 million, resulting in a debt-equity ratio of 1.1. Moody’s
Investors Service recognized the improvement by assigning a mid-range
double-B rating to PCA’s senior subordinated debt, moving investors from
the “small assurance” of single-B paper to the far-more-exalted “uncertainty
of position” of double-B obligations.
By the second quarter of 2003, bondholders faced far better
circumstances than they confronted in January 2000. Over that period, net
debt declined from $1,292 million to $607 million. The debt-equity ratio
decreased from 2.4 to 0.9. Credit fundamentals moved dramatically in favor
of PCA’s junk-bond investors.
Not only did the PCA 9.625s of 2009 benefit from the company’s
ability to pay down debt, thereby improving the credit standing of the
remaining obligations, but the bonds also profited from a dramatic decline
in interest rates. In January 2000, ten-year U.S. Treasury rates stood at 6.7
percent. By June 2003, ten-year Treasury yields halved, promising investors
only 3.3 percent. The powerful bond market rally and the dramatic credit
improvement combined to move the price of the PCA 9.625s of 2009 from
approximately par in early 2000 to around 108 in June 2003.
Unfortunately for bondholders, call provisions of the PCA 9.625s of
April 2009 dampened the security’s appreciation potential. On April 1,


=== PAGE 417 ===
2004, the company enjoyed the right to purchase the outstanding bonds at a
fixed price of 104.81. Because of improved credit standing and lower
interest rates, PCA would almost certainly exercise its right to call the
bonds and refinance at lower rates. Investors evaluating the bonds in mid
2003 knew they would almost certainly lose the bonds at a price of 104.81
on April Fool’s Day in 2004, placing a limit on the amount they would
reasonably pay for the securities.
In fact, holders of the PCA 9.625s of April 2009 did not need to wait
until April 2004 to relinquish their bonds. On June 23, 2003, the company
announced a tender offer for the securities at a price of 110.24, representing
somewhat more than a two-point premium to the pre-tender market price.
The company opted to pay 110.24 for the bonds on July 21, 2003 instead of
waiting to pay 104.81 on April 1, 2004, because the combination of the
firm’s improved credit condition and the market’s decreased interest rates
made it too expensive for PCA to leave the bonds outstanding. The tender
proved successful, as holders of 99.3 percent of the notes surrendered their
bonds to the company.
PCA issued new bonds to refund the PCA 9.625s of April 2009, paying
much lower rates of 4.5 percent on the five-year tranche and 5.9 percent on
the ten-year tranche. The dramatically reduced coupons saved PCA tens of
millions of dollars of interest expense over the remaining term of the
original financing. Both refinancing bond issues eschewed fixed-price call
provisions, as the junk-bond investors firmly demanded that the company
close the barn door after the stalls had emptied.
From an investor’s perspective, accepting the company’s tender
maximized returns. Based on the bond’s coupon, the tender price, and the
call price, if investors held the securities until the call date, they faced an
expected return of only 60 to 65 basis points over comparable-maturity
Treasuries. Rational holders of the PCA 9.625s of 2009 had no choice but
to tender their holdings.
The call provision proved costly to PCA’s senior subordinated
bondholders. In June 2003, the bonds traded in a close range, from a low of
108.2 to a high of 108.6 averaging approximately 108.4. Based on lower
interest rates and PCA’s improved credit standing, had the PCA 9.625s of
2009 not had a call provision, the price would have been in excess of 125.


=== PAGE 418 ===
The company’s fixed-price call option dramatically reduced the potential
for junk bondholder gains.
In spite of the dampening effect of the PCA 9.625s call provision,
bondholders received handsome holding-period returns. Buoyed by
improving credit fundamentals and declining interest rates, the junk-bond
investors garnered a return of 49.2 percent from January 28, 2000, the date
of the company’s IPO, to July 21, 2003, the date of the completion of the
tender offer. Junk-bond investors could not hope for better circumstances or
better results.
How did the PCA junk bond returns compare to results from closely
related alternative investments? Strikingly, a comparable-maturity U.S.
Treasury note produced a holding period return of 45.8 percent, as the
noncallable nature of the government issue allowed investors to benefit
fully from the bond market rally. The 3.4 percent holding period increment,
realized by PCA bondholders over the three-and-one-half years, represents
scant compensation for accepting a high degree of credit risk. U.S.
Treasuries produced risk-adjusted returns significantly higher than those
realized by holders of the PCA 9.625s.
Holders of PCA stock faced a tough set of circumstances. In contrast to
the strong market enjoyed by bondholders, equity owners faced a dismal
market environment. From the date of PCA’s IPO, which took place near
the peak of one of the greatest stock market bubbles ever, to the bond
tender-offer date, the S&P 500 declined a cumulative 24.3 percent. Bucking
a decidedly adverse market trend, PCA’s equity rose from the initial
offering price of $12.00 in January 2000 to $18.05 on July 21, 2003,
representing a holding period gain of 50.4 percent. Even in the worst of
worlds for equity holders and the best of worlds for bondholders, the equity
owners of PCA eked out a victory.
Upon reflection, the superior returns garnered by PCA’s equity holders
might be expected. Improving credit fundamentals for junk bond positions
necessarily correspond to an increase in the equity cushion supporting the
company’s fixed liabilities. An increase in the stock price provides one
means of enhancing the underlying support for the firm’s debt burden.
Since improving credit fundamentals frequently go hand in hand with
rallying stock prices, investors face better odds by owning unlimited-upside
stocks as opposed to constrained-potential bonds.


=== PAGE 419 ===
In the case of deteriorating credit fundamentals, junk bond investors
attain little or no edge relative to equity investors. Recall that the PCA
9.625s of April 2009 entered the markets in 1999 at the bottom of the
single-B rating category, precariously positioned with a “small assurance of
maintenance of contract terms.” Credit deterioration would likely damage
the investments of bondholders and stockholders alike.
Junk bond investors cannot win. When fundamentals improve, stock
returns dominate bond returns. When rates decline, noncallable bonds
provide superior risk-adjusted returns. When fundamentals deteriorate, junk
bond investors fall along with equity investors. Well-informed investors
avoid the no-win consequences of high yield fixed income investing.
Alignment of Interests
Junk bond owners face misalignment of interest problems even more severe
than those faced by investment-grade bondholders. In the case of fallen-
angel junk issues that began life as high quaility bonds and suffered a fall
from grace, declines in credit quality correspond to reductions in equity
values. In distressed situations, corporate managements usually work hard
to prevent further erosion in the company’s equity base. Tools available to
management include revenue enhancement and cost reduction. Obviously,
reducing interest expense and otherwise decreasing the value of debt
obligations represents one important means by which management can
improve the equity position. Holders of fallen angels find their interests at
odds with the interests of corporate management.
In the case of new-issue junk bonds, particularly those employed to
finance leveraged buyout deals or leveraged recapitalization transactions,
bondholders confront even more highly motivated, adversarial management
groups. Sophisticated, equity-oriented financial engineers bring numerous
tools to bear on the problem of increasing equity values substantially and
rapidly. As the financial operators work to limit the cost of debt, the
bondholders realize the mirror image of cost reduction in the form of return
diminution.
Market Characteristics


=== PAGE 420 ===
At December 31, 2006, the market value of high yield corporate bonds
totaled $657 billion. Yield to maturity amounted to 7.9 percent, with the
market showing an average maturity of 7.9 years and an average duration of
4.4 years.
Summary
Junk bond investors face a concentrated combination of the factors that
make high-grade corporate bonds a poor choice for investors. Magnified
credit risk, greater illiquidity, and more valuable call options pose a triple
threat to bondholders seeking high risk-adjusted returns. The relatively high
cost of junk bond financing provides incentives to stock-price-driven
corporate managements to diminish the value of the bond positions in order
to enhance the standing of share owners.
As protection against financial accidents or deflationary periods, junk
bonds prove even less useful than investment-grade bonds. The factors that
promise incremental yield—credit risk, illiquidity, and callability—work
against junk bond owners in times of crisis, undermining the ability of junk
bonds to provide portfolio protection.
The recent historical experience of junk investors confirms the
inadvisability of owning debt positions in highly leveraged corporations.
For the ten years ending December 31, 2006, Lehman Brothers High-Yield
Index produced annualized returns of 6.6 percent relative to 6.0 percent for
U.S. Treasuries and 6.5 percent for investment-grade corporates. While
structural differences in the indices (most notably differences in duration)
make the comparison less than perfect, the fact that junk bond investors
took far greater risk for insignificant incremental return comes through loud
and clear.
ASSET-BACKED SECURITIES
Asset-backed securities consist of fixed income instruments that rely on a
broad range of underlying assets (the backing in asset-backed) to provide
cash flows and security for payments to bondholders. While the most
commonly used asset in asset-backed securities consists of home


=== PAGE 421 ===
mortgages, bankers employ assets ranging from credit card receivables to
commercial lease payments to automobile finance obligations as collateral
for asset-backed deals.
Asset-backed transactions exhibit a high degree of sophisticated
financial structuring. Driven by a security issuer’s desire to remove assets
from the balance sheet and obtain low costs for the financing, the asset-
backed security purchaser sits across the table from a formidable adversary.
In the case of mortgage-backed securities—financial instruments that
pass through mortgage payments from homeowners to security holders—
investors face an unappealing set of responses to changes in interest rates. If
interest rates decline, homeowners enjoy the opportunity to prepay and
refinance the mortgage. Just as discharging a high-rate mortgage favors the
borrower, it hurts the holder of a mortgage-backed security by extinguishing
an attractive stream of high interest payments. Similarly, if rates rise,
homeowners tend to pay only the minimum required principal and interest
payment. Holders of mortgage-backed paper lose high-return assets in a
low-rate environment and retain low-return assets in a high-rate
environment.
In exchange for accepting a security that shortens when investors prefer
lengthening and lengthens when investors prefer shortening, holders of
mortgage-backed securities receive a premium rate of return. Whether the
premium constitutes fair compensation for the complex options embedded
in mortgage securities poses an extremely difficult question. Wall Street’s
version of rocket scientists employ complicated computer models in a quest
to determine the fair value of mortgage-backed securities. Sometimes the
models work, sometimes not. If financial engineers face challenges in
getting the option pricing right, what chance do individual investors have?
Optionality proves even more difficult to assess than credit risk. In the
case of fixed income instruments with credit risk, sensible investors look at
bond yields with skepticism, knowing that part of the return may be lost to
corporate downgrades or defaults. In the case of fixed income instruments
with high degrees of optionality, everyday investors hold no clue as to the
appropriate amount by which to discount stated yields to adjust for the
possible costs of the options. In fact, many professionals fail to understand
the difficult dynamics of fixed income options.


=== PAGE 422 ===
Piper Capital’s Worth Bruntjen
In a celebrated case of the early 1990s, Worth Bruntjen, a fixed income
specialist at Piper Capital in Minneapolis, built an enormous reputation as a
manager of mortgage-backed securities. Based on stellar results in the early
years of the decade, Bruntjen attracted significant amounts of capital from
retail and institutional investors alike.
Bruntjen managed the Piper Jaffray American Government Securities
Fund (AGF), one of a group of mortgage-bond investment vehicles for
retail investors. Driven by a powerful bull market in bonds and a portfolio
highly sensitive to interest rates, for the five years ending December 31,
1993, the fund returned 19.3 percent per annum, representing a substantial
increment over the 11.2 percent annual return of the Salomon Brothers
Mortgage Index. Bruntjen’s top-of-the-charts returns prompted Morningstar
to name this “visionary and guiding force” runner-up in its portfolio-
manager-of-the-year competition.8
Public records indicate that Bruntjen counted the State of Florida among
his institutional separate account clients. In fact, Florida pursued a perverse
investment strategy with its conservative operating funds, taking assets
from poorly performing managers and adding assets to market-beating
accounts. As a result of Bruntjen’s stellar results, by January 1994, the State
of Florida’s account with Bruntjen totaled in excess of $430 million, more
than double that of the nearest competitor.9
Bruntjen explained his strategy: “We buy government-agency paper that
has a higher interest rate than the 30-year bond, but has an average life of
only three to five years.”10 The fund manager’s “paper” included mortgages
and mortgage derivatives with a bull market bias. Nonetheless, Bruntjen’s
something-for-nothing explanation of his investment approach found a
receptive audience. Funds under Bruntjen’s management rose rapidly until
early 1994.
Unfortunately for fixed income investors, the fall of 1993 marked a high
point of the bond market rally, with ten-year U.S. Treasury yields reaching a
twenty-six-year low of 5.3 percent. Within a few short months, by May
1994, a wrenching decline in bond prices drove yields to 7.4 percent. The
Wall Street Journal described the spring meltdown in the mortgage market:
“The bloodbath in mortgage derivatives is claiming new casualties as


=== PAGE 423 ===
investors and dealers continue to rush for the exits, feeding a vicious cycle
of falling prices and evaporating demand.”11 The bear market that rocked
bond portfolios laid waste to Bruntjen’s approach.
During calendar year 1994, Bruntjen’s individual investors in AGF
experienced losses of nearly 29 percent. In contrast, the Salomon Brothers
Mortgage Index posted a modest 1.4 percent loss. Between January and
September, the Bruntjen’s State of Florida account incurred losses of $90
million, an entirely unacceptable result for supposedly conservatively
invested operating funds. Frustrated by the dismal returns, Florida
announced that it would pull nearly $120 million from Bruntjen’s account.
Retail and institutional investors suffered side by side.
The bond market carnage turned Bruntjen’s strategy on its head. When
rates rose, the mortgage specialist’s use of “significant investments in
volatile derivatives like inverse floating-rate bonds and principal-only
strips” caused his funds to behave like long-term, thirty-year bonds, not like
the shorter-term bonds he cited in his strategy description.12 Heightened
sensitivity to interest rates in a rising rate environment doomed Bruntjen’s
investors.
Worth Bruntjen, Morningstar’s “visionary,” failed to understand the
risks of his strategy as did his superiors at Piper Capital. Supposedly
sophisticated institutional investors at the State of Florida failed to
understand the risks of his strategy. Mutual-fund consulting firm
Morningstar failed to understand the risk of his strategy. The complexity
inherent in understanding and evaluating mortgage-related securities argues
for avoiding exposure to the potentially harmful options imbedded in
mortgage instruments.
Florida’s Sub-Prime Folly
In 2007, after clearly failing to learn from the Piper Capital debacle, the
State of Florida once again embarrassed itself in mishandling a short-term
investment portfolio. This time, Florida’s Local Government Investment
Pool (LGIP) produced the dismal results by exposing the fund to highly
structured investment in low quality, sub-prime investments.


=== PAGE 424 ===
Prior to the mishap, at the end of 2007’s third quarter, the fund
contained $27.3 billion13 in 2,168 individual accounts maintained by 995
local government participants.14 In the words of the Florida State Board of
Administration (SBA), the pool sought “to provide stable returns for
participants with an emphasis on safety and liquidity of principal.”15
Belying its conservative mandate, the LGIP pursued a yield chasing
strategy, characterized by Bloomberg Markets as “more aggressive than
most states.” In October 2007, Florida’s 5.63 percent yield represented the
“highest return of any public fund in the U.S.”16 The next month, in
November, Florida’s high posted yield appeared less promising. Dogged by
rumors of impaired holdings, Florida responded with a November 9th
“Update on Sub-Prime Mortgage Meltdown and State Board of
Administration Investments.” The report begins to address the acute
problems with the LGIP on Chapter 2 with the Pollyannaish observation
that “[w]e are pleased to report that none of the SBA’s short-term portfolios
have any direct exposure to sub-prime residential mortgages.” Talk about a
distinction without a difference. As LGIP participants were about to find
out, indirect exposure holds the potential to harm as much as direct
exposure.
Prompted by concerns over holdings of downgraded and defaulted debt,
in November participants began leaving the fund, ultimately withdrawing
$12 billion, or 46 percent of the fund’s assets. Closing the chicken coop
door after losing a substantial portion of the flock, on November 29 the
state froze withdrawals. The once-largest and once-highest-yielding fund
stood in disarray.17
Florida hired BlackRock to deal with the mess. BlackRock separated
the pool into a prime pool, Fund A, with approximately $12 billion, and a
less-than-prime pool, Fund B, with approximately $2 billion. Fund B
contained a variety of toxic waste, including structured finance company
paper issued by KKR Atlantic Fund Trust and KKR Pacific Fund Trust
(sponsored by buyout firm KKR), Axon Financial Fund (sponsored by
buyout firm TPG), and Ottimo Fund (registered in the Cayman Islands). On
top of the asset-backed commercial paper, Fund B included substantial
holdings in CDs issued by Countrywide Bank, the troubled (and
downgraded) mortgage lender, due to the CDs’ “significant” credit risk.


=== PAGE 425 ===
Fund A, with its high quality asset pool, allowed limited withdrawals a
week after the freeze, beginning on December 6th. Participants promptly
withdrew nearly $2 billion. The State of Florida made a mess of its short-
term fund pool. Florida erred first, just as in the Piper Capital case, by
aggressively chasing yield without regard to risk. Florida erred second by
allowing a run on the bank, paying out $12 billion to early movers at par
and leaving all of the impaired assets with the laggards. Florida needs to
rethink its approach to investment management.
Clearly, many investors lack the capacity to understand the options in
mortgage-backed securities. From a broader portfolio perspective, option-
related and credit-related issues in mortgage-backed securities work against
investors who wish to use the bonds to hedge against deflation or financial
distress. The prepayment option held by the homeowner works like a call
option on a corporate bond. If rates fall, prompted by deflationary forces or
financial distress, the holder of mortgage-backed securities may lose the
investment, along with protection against unfavorable circumstances.
Similarly, defaults on mortgages, most likely in times of distress, undermine
the value of fixed income’s crisis hedging attributes.
Alignment of Interests
Holders of asset-backed securities stand opposite some of the marketable
securities world’s most sophisticated financial engineers. At best, asset-
backed security investors buying newly minted securities should anticipate
low returns from the issuer’s use of a complex structure to further the
corporate objective of generating low-cost debt. At worst, the complexity of
asset-backed securities leads to an opacity that prevents investors from
understanding the intrinsic character of investment positions. In extreme
situations, the Rube Goldberg nature of asset-backed security arrangements
causes serious damage to investor portfolios.
Market Characteristics
At December 31, 2006, the market value of asset-backed securities totaled
$105 billion. Yield to maturity amounted to 5.3 percent, with the market


=== PAGE 426 ===
exhibiting an average maturity of 3.2 years and an average duration of 2.8
years.18
Summary
Asset-backed securities involve a high degree of financial engineering. As a
general rule of thumb, the more complexity that exists in a Wall Street
creation, the faster and farther investors should run. At times, the creators
and issuers of complex securities fail to understand how the securities might
behave under various circumstances. What chance does the nonprofessional
investor have?
Many mortgage-backed securities enjoy the support of government-
sponsored enterprises, causing investors to assume that the securities carry
low levels of risk. Investor assumptions may prove false on two counts.
First, the credit risk may ultimately prove greater than market participants
assume. Second, the GSE-induced investor complacency may mask
significant risk of exposure to hard-to-understand options. Investors
beware.
Just as with other forms of fixed income, the issuer of asset-backed
securities seeks cheap financing. Cheap financing for issuers translates into
low returns for investors. Combine low expected returns with high
complexity and investor interests suffer.
As with many other segments of the fixed income markets, investors in
asset-backed securities appear not to have reaped rewards for accepting
credit and call risk. For the ten years ending December 31, 2006, the
Lehman Brothers Asset-Backed Security Index returned 6.0 percent per
annum, essentially matching the Lehman Brothers U.S. Treasury Index
return of 6.0 percent per annum. Like other comparisons of bond index
returns, the numbers do not account for differences in index composition.
Nonetheless, over the past decade asset-backed bond investors appear to
have fallen short in the quest to generate risk-adjusted excess returns.
FOREIGN BONDS


=== PAGE 427 ===
By asset size, foreign-currency-denominated bonds represent a formidable
market, falling just short of the aggregate market value of U.S.-dollar-
denominated debt. Yet, in spite of the market’s size, foreign bonds offer
little of value to U.S. investors.
Consider bonds of similar maturity and similar credit quality, with one
denominated in U.S. dollars and the other denominated in foreign currency.
Because monetary conditions differ from country to country, the two bonds
would likely promise different interest rates. An investor might expect that
different interest rates and different economic conditions in different
countries would lead to different investment results. If, however, the
investor hedges each of the foreign bond’s cash flows by selling sufficient
foreign currency in the forward markets to match the anticipated receipt of
interest and principal payments, then the U.S. dollar cash flows of the
dollar-denominated bond match exactly the U.S. dollar cash flows of the
foreign-currency-denominated bond hedged into U.S. dollars. In other
words, an unhedged foreign currency bond consists of a U.S. dollar bond
plus some foreign exchange exposure.
Foreign currencies, in and of themselves, provide no expected return.
Some market players, as part of so-called macro strategies, speculate on the
direction of foreign exchange rates. Foreign bond mutual funds provide a
vehicle through which investment managers sometimes take speculative
positions. Top-down bets on currencies fail to generate a reliable source of
excess returns, because the factors influencing economic conditions, in
general, and interest rates, in particular, prove far too complex to predict
with consistency. Sensible investors avoid currency speculation.
In a portfolio context, foreign exchange exposure may produce the
benefit of additional diversification. Even with no expected return, the lack
of full correlation between currency movements and other asset class
fluctuations reduces portfolio risk. However, investors should obtain
foreign exchange exposure not through foreign bond positions, but in
connection with an asset class expected to produce superior returns, namely
foreign equities.
Since foreign currency positions, per se, promise a zero expected return,
investors in foreign bonds expect returns similar to returns from U.S. dollar
bonds. Yet, unhedged foreign bonds fail to provide the same protection
against financial crisis or deflation enjoyed by holders of U.S. Treasury


=== PAGE 428 ===
securities. In the event of a market trauma, U.S. investors have no idea what
impact foreign exchange rates will have on the value of foreign bond
positions. The unknown influence of foreign currency translation forces
investors hoping to benefit from fixed income’s special diversifying
characteristics to avoid unhedged foreign bond exposure.
Alignment of Interests
Holders of domestic Treasury bonds expect fair treatment from their
government. Unlike the inherently adversarial relationship between
corporate issuers and corporate creditors, governments find no reason to
disadvantage their citizens. If investors purchase foreign-currency-
denominated bond issues held largely by citizens of the country of issue,
those investors may well benefit from a reasonable alignment of interests.
However, if a foreign government debt issue resides primarily in the
hands of external owners, the alignment of interests breaks down. In fact, if
political considerations trump contractual obligations, external holders of
foreign government paper may suffer worse consequences than owners of
troubled corporate debt. When international politics enter the picture,
foreign bondholders may suffer.
Market Characteristics
At December 31, 2006, foreign-currency-denominated bonds totaled a
substantial $14.5 trillion, of which $9.2 trillion represented issuance by
foreign governments and $1.9 trillion represented investment grade issues
of corporations. Foreign-currency-denominated, high yield corporate issues
totaled a paltry $114 billion, reflecting the market’s relative immaturity.
Yield to maturity for foreign-currency-denominated government paper
amounted to 3.2 percent, with an average maturity of 8.2 years and duration
of 6.2 years. Foreign-currency-denominated investment-grade corporate
bonds promised yields of 4.3 percent with average maturity of 7.0 years and
duration of 5.3 years.
Summary


=== PAGE 429 ===
Foreign-currency-denominated bonds share domestic bonds’ burden of low
expected returns without the benefit of domestic fixed income’s special
diversifying power. Fully hedged foreign bonds mimic U.S. bonds (with the
disadvantage of added complexity and costs stemming from the hedging
process). Unhedged foreign bonds supply investors with U.S. dollar bond
exposure plus (perhaps unwanted) foreign exchange exposure. Foreign-
currency-denominated bonds play no role in well-constructed investment
portfolios.
2007 PERFORMANCE UPDATE
Based on data presented in the summary section for each of the fixed
income alternatives, Treasury bonds appear to provide superior risk-
adjusted returns. The return comparisons fail to provide a completely fair
test, however, because differences in duration throughout the ten-year
measurement period cause the comparisons to fall short of the apples-to-
apples standard.
Domestic corporate and high yield returns for the ten years ending
December 31, 2006 produced inadequate margins over Treasuries to
compensate for illiquidity, credit risk, and call risk. Asset-backed securities
actually show a small deficit relative to Treasuries. Although the shorter
duration of asset-backed instruments explains part of the return deficit, even
after adjusting for the shorter duration, investors received insufficient
compensation for straying from the full faith and credit of the U.S.
government.
Table A.1 Treasury Bonds Trump Riskier Alternatives
Ten-Year Returns of Fixed Income Indices
Source: Lehman Brothers
 
Period Ending
December 31,
Index Duration
(Years)
 
2006 (%)
2007 (%)
December 31,
2007
U.S. treasuries
5.97
5.91
5.2


=== PAGE 430 ===
Domestic
corporate
6.52
5.96
6.3
High yield
6.59
5.51
4.6
Asset-backed
securities
5.95
5.43
3.4
The credit crisis during the second half of 2007 emphatically reinforced
the superiority of Treasury bonds. Trailing Treasury returns scarcely moved
as the ten-year measurement period advanced from the end of 2006 to the
end of 2007. In contrast, corporate bond returns declined by 56 basis points
to a level of only five basis points above Treasuries. High yield bond
returns dropped by 108 basis points per annum for the ten-year period,
falling a full 40 basis points below the Treasury return. Similarly, asset-
backed securities lost 52 basis points per annum, increasing the deficit
relative to Treasuries to 48 basis points.
One lesson of the 2007 credit crisis concerns the fact that investors in
bonds with the unattractive characteristics of illiquidity, credit risk, and call
risk underperformed Treasuries for the year ending December 31, 2007.
The other lesson concerns the timing of the dramatic short-term
underperformance of corporate, high yield, and asset-backed securities
during the second half of 2007. Just when investors most needed protection
provided by bond positions, non-Treasury holdings disappointed.
CONCLUSION
A host of fixed income markets fall short of the diversifying power inherent
in default-free, full-faith-and-credit obligations of the U.S. government.
Factors including credit risk, call options, illiquidity, and foreign exchange
limit the attractiveness of investment-grade corporate bonds, high yield
bonds, asset-backed securities, and foreign bonds. Sensible investors avoid
the sirens’ song that promises something (in the form of hoped-for
incremental return) for nothing (in the form of ignored incremental risk).
OceanofPDF.com


=== PAGE 431 ===
Notes
CHAPTER 2: ENDOWMENT PURPOSES
1. Brooks Mather Kelley, Yale: A History. (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1974.)
2. The Governor and lieutenant governor continued to serve ex officio as
Fellows of the Corporation, although in the modern era they have not
participated actively in Yale’s governance.
3. Merle Curti and Roderick Nash, Philanthropy in the Shaping of
American Higher Education (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University
Press, 1965); Frederick Rudolph, The American College and University:
A History (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1962).
4. Hugh Davis Graham and Nancy Diamond, The Rise of American
Research Universities (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1997).
5. Ibid.
6. Howard R. Bowen, The Costs of Higher Education: How Much Do
Colleges and Universities Spend per Student and How Much Should
They Spend? (New York: McGraw Hill, 1980). See also Graham and
Diamond, Universities, p. 97.
7. Denise LaVoie, “School Year Begins with New Unification Church
Affiliation,” Associated Press, 28 August 1992.
8. New York Times
9. Joseph Berger, “University of Bridgeport Honors Reverend Moon,
Fiscal Savior,” New York Times, 8 September 1995.
10. Lynde Phelps Wheeler, Josiah Willard Gibbs (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1951), 91–92.
11. Leonard Curry, “Congressional Hearing Puts Stanford Officials on Hot
Seat,” The Orange County Register, 14 March 1991.


=== PAGE 432 ===
12. The 0.5 percent increment was designated “to support renewal of
campus buildings and infrastructure.” See Stanford University Annual
Financial Report, 1995.
13. The unpublished survey of endowment size and institutional quality
relies on research conducted by the Yale Investment Office.
14. “The Fortune 1,000 Ranked Within Industries” Fortune, 28 April
1997.
15. “Best Colleges 1998,” U.S. News & World Report, 1 September 1997.
USNWR ranks 28 of the 29 Carnegie Universities. Rockefeller
University, because it does not grant degrees, is excluded from the
study.
16. The National Center for Education and Statistics, Directory of Post
Secondary Institutions, 1987–1997, vol. 1.
CHAPTER 3: INVESTMENT AND SPENDING GOALS
1. James Tobin, “What Is Permanent Endowment Income?” American
Economic Review 64, no. 2 (1974): 427–432.
2. Harvard University, Managing Harvard’s Endowment. (Harvard
University, 1990).
3. Even though Harvard’s 1974 spending policy rationale contains flaws,
in practice the university spends at prudent levels, producing payouts
similar to those of comparable institutions.
4. Yale University, Report of the Treasurer, 1965–66, ser. 62, no. 19 (New
Haven: 1966), 6–7.
5. National Association of College and University Business Officers
(NACUBO). Data are from various Endowment Studies. Prepared by
Cambridge Associates, Inc.
6. In the 2006 NACUBO survey, 335 institutions reported using target
spending rates.
7. See Table 2.2 for additional information.
8. Karen W. Arenson, “Q&A. Modest Proposal. An Economist Asks,
Does Harvard Really Need $15 Billion?” New York Times, 2 August
1998.


=== PAGE 433 ===
9. Henry Hansmann. “Why Do Universities Have Endowments?” PONPO
Working Paper No. 109, Program on Non-Profit Organizations,
Institution for Social and Policy Studies, Yale University. January 1986,
21.
10. Ibid., 23.
11. Tobin, “Endowment Income,” 427.
CHAPTER 4: INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY
1. Roger G. Ibbotson and Paul D. Kaplan, “Does Asset Allocation Policy
Explain 40, 90, or 100 Percent of Performance?” Financial Analysts
Journal 56, no. 1 (2000): 32.
2. Ibid., 29.
3. Charles D. Ellis, “Winning the Loser’s Game” Timeless Strategies for
Successful Investing, 3d ed. (New York: McGraw Hill, 1998), 11.
4. William N. Goetzmann and Philippe Jorion, “A Century of Global
Stock Markets,” Journal of Finance (forthcoming).
5. Stephen J. Brown, William N. Goetzmann, and Stephen A. Ross,
“Survival,” Journal of Finance 50, no. 3. (1995): 855.
6. Robert Lovett, “Gilt-Edged Insecurity,” Saturday Evening Post, 1937.
7. Cambridge Associates, Inc. 1997 NACUBO Endowment Study.
Washington, D.C.: National Association of College and University
Business Officers, 1998).
8. John Maynard Keynes, “Memorandum for the Estates Committee,
King’s College, Cambridge, May 8, 1938.” in Charles D. Ellis, ed.,
Classics. An Investor’s Anthology (Homewood, Ill.: Business One Irwin
in association with the Institutie of Chartered Financial Analysts, 1989),
79–82.
9. Gilbert Burck, “A New Kind of Stock Market,” Bank Credit Analyst,
April 1998, 22. First published in Fortune, March 1959.
10. Ibid.
11. Endowment asset allocation figures come from Cambridge Associates,
a consulting firm specializing in advising not-for-profit clients.
12. See Robert J. Shiller, Market Volatility (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1989).
13. Ibid., 2–3.


=== PAGE 434 ===
14. Burton Malkiel and Paul Firstenberg, Managing Risk in an Uncertain
Era: An Analysis for Endowed Institutions (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University, 1976).
15. Brady Commission, Report of the Presidential Task Force on Market
Mechanisms, January 1988. (Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1988), 53.
16. Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money.
(New York: Harcourt and Brace, 1964), 155.
17. Ibid., 160.
18. Ibid., 151.
19. Benjamin Graham, The Intelligent Investor (New York: Harper
Business, 1973), 279.
20. See Eugene Fama and Kenneth French, “Size and Book-to-Market
Factors in Earnings and Returns,” Journal of Finance, 50, no. 1. (1995):
131–155, and Eugene Fama and Kenneth French. “The Cross-Section of
Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance 47, no. 2 (1992): 427–
465.
21. Graham, Intelligent Investor.
22. Keynes, General Theory, 157.
23. Douglas Appell, “GMO’s Grantham not worried about the bulls,”
Pensions & Investments, 5 March 2007.
CHAPTER 5: ASSET ALLOCATION
1. Moody’s Investor Service, Moody’s Transportation Manual (New York:
Moody’s Investor Service, Inc., 1973), 358–370.
2. Richard Michaud, “The Markowitz Optimization Enigma: Is
‘Optimized’ Optimal?” Financial Analysts Journal 45, no. 1 (1989):
31–42.
3. Richard Bookstaber, “Global Risk Management: Are We Missing the
Point?” (paper based on presentations given at the Institute for
Quantitative Research in Finance, October 1996 and at the Internal
Models for Market Risk Evaluation: Experiences, Problems and
Perspectives Conference, Rome, Italy, June 1996.)
4. Keynes, General Theory, 1964, 155. The full quote from Keynes is:
“The social object of skilled investment should be to defeat the dark


=== PAGE 435 ===
forces of time and ignorance which envelop our future.”
5. Jeremy Grantham. “Everything I Know about the Stock Market in 15
Minutes,” Internal Memo.
6. Vijay Kumar Chopra and William T. Ziemba, “The Effect of Errors in
Means, Variances, and Covariances on Optimal Portfolio Choice,”
Journal of Portfolio Management 19, no. 2 (1993): 6–11.
7. Roger G. Ibbotson and Rex A. Sinquefield, “Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and
Inflation: Year-by-Year Historical Returns (1926–1974),” Journal of
Business 49, no. 1, (1976): 11–47.
8. Paul M. Firstenberg, Stephen A. Ross, and Randall C. Zisler. “Real
Estate: The Whole Story,” Journal of Portfolio Management 24, no. 3
(1988): 31. Apparently, the article continues to be highly regarded as it
appears in the 1997 publication, Streetwise. The Best of the Journal of
Portfolio Management, Peter L. Bernstein & Frank J. Fabozzi, editors,
Princeton University Press.
CHAPTER 6: ASSET ALLOCATION MANAGEMENT
1. Linda Sandler, “Endowments at Top Schools Bruised in Market,” Wall
Street Journal. 13 October 1998.
2. Sowood Capital Management: Sowood Alpha Fund (pitch book), 2004.
3. Gregory Zuckerman and Craig Karmin, “Sowood’s Short, Hot
Summer,” Wall Street Journal, 27 October 2007.
4. Ibid.
5. Sowood letter to investors: 30 July 2007.
6. Roger Lowenstein, When Genius Failed. The Rise and Fall of Long-
Term Capital Management (New York: Random House, 2001): 224–25.
7. John R. Dorfman, “Report on Common Fund Cites Warning Signs,”
Wall Street Journal, 17 January 1996, C1.
8. Keynes, General Theory, 157.
CHAPTER 7: TRADITIONAL ASSET CLASSES
1. Ibbotson Associates, Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation 2006 Yearbook
(Chicago: Ibbotson Associates, 2003): 27–28.


=== PAGE 436 ===
2. Jeremy Siegel, Stocks for the Long Run (New York: McGraw Hill,
2002): 6.
3. William N. Goetzmann and Philippe Jorion, “A Century of Global
Stock Markets,” NBER Working Paper Series, Working Paper 5901
(National Bureau of Economic Research, 1997), 16.
4. Robert Arnott, “Dividends and the Three Dwarfs,” Financial Analysts
Journal 59, no. 2, (2003): 4.
5. James K. Glassman and Kevin A. Hassett, Dow 36,000: The New
Strategy for Profiting from the Coming Rise in the Stock Market (New
York: Random House, 1999).
6. Siegel, Stocks for the Long Run, 210.
7. Geraldine Fabrikant and David Cay Johnston, “G.E. Perks Raise Issues
About Taxes, “New York Times, 9 September 2002.
8. “Jack’s Booty,” editorial, Wall Street Journal, 10 September 2002.
9. David Leonhardt, “Reining In the Imperial C.E.O.,” New York Times,
15 September 2002.
10. Steve Lohr and Joel Brinkley, “Microsoft Management Tells Workers
There Will Be No Breakup,” New York Times, 26 April 2000.
11. Jathon Sapsford and Ken Brown, “J.P. Morgan Rolls Dice on
Microsoft Options,” Wall Street Journal, 9 July 2003.
12. Data from Wilshire Associates.
13. Ibbotson Associates, 2004 Yearbook, 224, 234.
14. Carole Gould, “Better Understanding of Bonds,” New York Times, 27
August 1995.
15. Publicdebt.treas.gov, “Treasury Calls 8-1/4 Percent Bonds of 2000–
05,” http://www.publicdebt.treas.gov/com/com114cl.htm.
16. Bureau of the Public Debt, Press Release of January 15, 2004:
“Treasury Calls 9-1/8 Percent Bonds of 2004–09.”
17. Stephen J. Brown, William N. Goetzmann and Stephen A. Ross,
“Survival,” Journal of Finance 50, no. 3 (1995).
18. Antoine van Agtmael, The Emerging Markets Century (New York:
Free Press, 2007): 307–8.
CHAPTER 8: ALTERNATIVE ASSET CLASSES


=== PAGE 437 ===
1. The amount of the capital required to execute the Newell Rubbermaid
trade ranges from an aggressive value of the Rubbermaid price less the
net proceeds from the short sale of Newell (1313/16 -2.28 = 11.5325), to
a conservative value of the Newell short position (.7883 x 43.26 =
34.10). Choosing the value of the Rubbermaid share (3113/16)
represents a middle-of-the-road position.
2. Roger G. Ibbotson and Peng Chen, “The A, B, Cs of Hedge Funds:
Alphas, Betas, and Costs,” Yale ICF Working Paper No. 06-10 (Yale
International Center for Finance, September 2006), 2.
3. Burton G. Malkiel and Atanu Saha, “Hedge Funds: Risk and Return,”
Financial Analysts Journal 61, no. 6 (2005): 82.
4. “Merrill Lynch Factor Index. An Alternative to Investable Hedge Fund
Indices,” Merrill Lynch, Global Markets and Investment Banking
Group, September 2006.
5. Kevin Mirabile and Rosemarie Lakeman, Observations on the Rapid
Growth of the Hedge Fund Industry. (Barclays Capital, 2004): 2.
6. Treas.gov, “Key Initiatives,”
http://www.treas.gov/offices/domesticfinance/key-initiatives/tips.html.
7. Data from Bloomberg; LehmanLive; National Association of Real
Estate Investment Trusts.
8. National Association of Real Estate Investment Trusts, “Forming and
Operating a Real Estate Investment Trust,”
http://www.nareit.com/aboutreits/formingaREIT.cfm.
9. Marc Cardillo, Robert Lang, Maggie Patton, and Andrew Heath, “U.S.
Real Estate and REIT Investing. Executive Summary,” Cambridge
Associates, 2007.
10. Green Street Advisors, “REIT Share Price Premiums to Green Street
NAV Estimates,” http://www.greenstreetadvisors.com/premnav.html.
11. Matt Terrien, “Investing in Direct Energy: A Diversification Tool for
Portfolios,” (Prepared for Merit Energy Company) Ibbotson Associates.
11 October 1999.
12. “Warburg Pincus Completes Acquisition of Bausch & Lomb,” Bausch
& Lomb newsroom. www.bausch.com, 26 October 2007.
13. 2006 Investment Benchmarks Report: Buyouts and Other Private
Equity (New York: Thomson Financial, 2006).


=== PAGE 438 ===
14. Steven N. Kaplan and Antoinette Schoar, “Private Equity
Performance: Returns, Persistence, and Capital Flows,” Journal of
Finance, no. 4 (August 2005): 1791.
15. 2006 Investment Benchmarks Report: Buyouts.
16. Josh Lerner and Antoinette Schoar, 17 January 2008.
17. Keynes, General Theory, 160.
18. Andrew Metrick and Ayako Yasuda, “The Economics of Private
Equity Funds,” (September 9, 2007). Swedish Institute for Financial
Research. Conference on The Economics of the Private Equity Market.
19. Estimated numbers, based on data collected by Cambridge Associates.
Controlled capital is defined as current net asset value of the aggregate
partnerships plus aggregate undrawn capital. All data refers to the U.S.
market only.
20. Randall E. Stross, eBoys: The First Inside Account of Venture
Capitalists at Work (New York: Ballantine Publishing Group, 2000):
182.
21. Ibid. xv.
22. 2006 Investment Benchmarks Report: Venture Capital (New York:
Thomson Financial, 2006).
23. Kaplan and Schoar, Journal of Finance 40: 1792.
24. Kaplan and Schoar, Journal of Finance 40: 1809.
25. Estimated numbers, based on data collected by Cambridge Associates.
Controlled capital is defined as current net asset value of the aggregate
partnerships plus aggregate undrawn capital. All data refers to the U.S.
market only.
CHAPTER 9: ASSET CLASS MANAGEMENT
1. Keynes, General Theory, 155–56.
2. The information on Granville is drawn from Rhonda Brammer, “10
Years After He Peaked, Will Joe Granville Rise Again?” Barron’s, 24
August 1992.
3. James J. Cramer, “The Bull Case of the Individual Investor,”
TheStreet.com, 28 January 2000.
4. Ibid.


=== PAGE 439 ===
5. James J. Cramer, “Cramer the Contrarian Remains Unconvinced, Part
1,” TheStreet.com. 14 February 2000.
6. James J. Cramer, “Cramer the Contrarian Remains Unconvinced, Part
2,” TheStreet.com. 14 February 2000.
7. James J. Cramer, “Scrutinizing the Value Managers,” TheStreet.com. 11
February 2000.
8. James J. Cramer, “Cramer the Contrarian Remains Unconvinced, Part
4,” TheStreet.com. 14 February 2000.
9. Bill Alpert, “Shorting Cramer,” Barron’s, 20 August 2007: 23–25.
10. Thyra Mangan, “Comments of T. Mangan on S7-12-06,” 28 March
2007: Sec.gov.
11. Bill Alpert, “Shorting Cramer,” Barron’s, 20 August 2007: 25.
12. Irving Fisher, The Rate of Interest. Its Nature, Determination and
Relation to Economic Phenomena (Macmillan Company, 1907): 217.
13. “Buffett’s Job Description: ‘They May Be Hard to Identify,’” Wall
Street Journal. 28 April, 2007.
14. The discussion of entrepreneurial capitalism draws heavily on a 1997
essay by G. Leonard Baker, General Partner of Sutter Hill Ventures,
“How Silicon Valley Works: Reflections on 25 years in the Venture
Capital Business,” 1997.
15. Joseph A. Schumpeter, The Theory of Economic Development, trans.
Redvers Opie (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1934), 66.
16. Joseph A. Schumpeter. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, (New
York: Harper & Brothers, 1950), 83.
17. Ibid.
18. Fortress Investment Group LLC, Form S-1, 8 November 2006: 4.
19. Fortress Investment Group LLC, Form S-1/A, 2 February 2007: 2.
20. Fortress Investment Group LLC, Form 10-K, 31 December 2006: 82–
3.
21. Fortress, Form S-1/A, 62.
22. Ibid., 106.
23. Ibid., 15.
24. United Asset Management, United Asset Management Annual Report,
1997, 2.
25. Sara Calian and Laura Saunders Egodigwe, “Old Mutual Agrees to
Acquire Asset-Management Firm UAM,” Wall Street Journal, 20 June


=== PAGE 440 ===
2000.
26. Ibid.
27. Douglas Appell, “Old Mutual Affiliates to Gain More Equity,”
Pensions & Investments, 16 October 2007.
28. Andrew Ross Sorkin and Michael J. de la Merced, “Home Depot Said
to Cut Price of Supply Unit by $2 Billion,” International Herald
Tribune, 27 August 2007.
29. George Anders, “Captive Client: Morgan Stanley Found a Gold Mine
of Fees,” Wall Street Journal, 14 December 1990, sec. A.
30. Ibid.
31. Wall Street Journal, 4 June 1991, 6.
32. Ibid.
33. Ibid.
34. Ibid.
35. Jenny Strasburg and Katherine Burton, “Goldman Global Equity Fund
Gets $3 Billion in Capital,” Bloomberg.com, 13 August 2007.
36. Henny Sender, Kate Kelly and Gregory Zuckerman, “Goldman
Wagers on Cash Infusion to Show Resolve,” Wall Street Journal, 14
August 2007.
37. “GS—Goldman Sachs Conference Call,” Thomson StreetEvents,
Final Transcript; 13 August 2007: 4–5.
38. Wall Street Journal, 14 August 2007.
39. Jeffrey Taylor, “SEC Wants Investment Managers to Tell Clients More
About ‘Soft Dollar’ Services,” Wall Street Journal, 15 February 1997,
5, 21.
40. Ibid., 40.
41. Barry B. Burr, “Soft Dollar Managers Pay.” (Chicago) Pensions and
Investments, 10 August 1998, Editorial section, 10.
42. SEC, Inspection Report, 3.
43. Advisory Council on Employee Welfare and Benefit Plans, Report of
the Working Groups on Soft Dollars/Commission Recapture.
(Washington D.C., 13 November 1997), 5, 21.
44. Sec.gov, Christopher Cox, “Speech by SEC Chairman: Address to the
National Italian-American Foundation” (Washington, D.C., 31 May
2007).
