

=== PAGE 321 ===
types of investors. The largest pool of assets, designed to track the S&P
500, contained $127 billion on December 31, 2006. Before fees the fund
returned 8.46 percent for the trailing ten years relative to 8.42 percent for
the S&P 500 index. The much smaller bond pool, with $1.6 billion on
December 31, 2006, showed similarly impressive results, with ten-year
returns of 6.33 percent relative to 6.26 percent for the Lehman Brothers
Government Corporate Index.
The commodity-like nature of passive investing commands commodity-
like compensation. Index fund managers compete with the alternative of
internally managed passive portfolios, forcing fees to a paltry two basis
points per year for large accounts.** By choosing passive alternatives for
efficiently priced assets, investors expect predictable results at a bargain
price.
While strong arguments support passive management for all marketable
securities, two factors argue strongly for passive management of bond
portfolios in particular. First, to satisfy the deflation hedging role of fixed
income, investors must hold long-term, high quality, noncallable bonds,
suggesting the creation of stable duration government bond portfolios.
Second, the extraordinary efficiency in the pricing of government bonds
makes active security selection decisions a costly exercise in futility. The
need for a stable maturity structure and the futility of individual security
bets require that investors manage bond portfolios passively.
While domestic equity investors enjoy more flexibility in structuring
portfolios than bond investors, the difficulty of identifying material
mispricings in the stock market, particularly among large-capitalization
securities, leads many investors to index common stocks. By avoiding high
fees and substantial transactions costs, index funds provide long-term
results that represent a formidable hurdle for investors hoping to
outperform. Yet, in spite of the clear difficulties in producing risk-adjusted
excess returns, most investors pursue active management strategies.
Active Strategies
Careful active investors pay close attention to fee arrangements,
recognizing that fees represent a substantial obstacle to market-beating


=== PAGE 322 ===
performance. Active managers of marketable securities generally receive
asset-based fees in exchange for portfolio management services. On one
level, interests coincide. To the extent that a manager increases assets
through superior investment performance, both the manager and the
investor win as the manager’s income increases and the investor’s return
pleases. On other levels, interests conflict. The manager may pursue a
“staying in business” strategy to protect fee income by closet indexing,
holding a market-like portfolio unlikely to produce results that would lead
to termination. Perhaps even more damaging, the manager may conclude
that gathering assets provides greater fee income than generating superior
returns.
In growing assets, managers simply respond to economic incentives.
With asset-based fees, income increases as assets under management
increase. Frequently, managers find it easier to add assets by attracting new
accounts than by creating excess returns. With distressingly few exceptions,
fund managers aggressively pursue marketing activities, attempting to
gather as many assets as possible. Retaining assets requires avoiding
disastrous performance, causing money managers to create market-like
portfolios that all but eliminate the chance for superior performance.
Investment management represents, at best, a secondary consideration for
most institutional fund managers.
Creating appropriate deal structures allows investors to mitigate many
of the conflicts inherent in the investment advisory relationship. Sensible
fee arrangements contain two elements: base compensation that covers
reimbursement of reasonable overhead costs and incentive compensation
that rewards a manager’s value added. The incentive compensation, or
profits interest, represents a share of the returns generated in excess of a
benchmark appropriate to the investment activity. For example, large-
capitalization domestic marketable equity managers might be rewarded for
returns generated in excess of the S&P 500, while foreign equity managers
might receive a profits interest in returns above the Morgan Stanley Capital
International EAFE Index. Fair deal structures, rare in the investment
management arena, encourage appropriate behavior on the part of money
managers.
Unfortunately, the overwhelming majority of marketable security
managers employ asset-based fee schemes, causing market gains or losses


=== PAGE 323 ===
and portfolio inflows or outflows to overwhelm the impact of manager skill.
Even though a number of managers offer superficially attractive incentive
compensation arrangements, three factors diminish the appeal of most
schemes. First, the vast bulk of marketable security funds generate profits
primarily from asset-based fees, encouraging managers to emphasize
increasing asset totals. In other words, even when firms offer incentive
arrangements, those incentive arrangements fail to influence fund manager
behavior because investment firms continue to rely on fee income
expressed as a percentage of assets under management. Second, investment
managers tend to offer terms on incentive schemes that involve modest
levels of risk to the firm’s existing income flows. Instead of taking a “blank
slate” approach that sets baseline fees at a level that covers reasonable
overhead, money managers try to structure incentive arrangements that
ensure continued income flows even with mediocre performance, protecting
the profit margins implicit in existing fee structures. Finally, investors
choosing between a traditional asset-based fee and an alternative incentive-
oriented structure encounter cognitive dissonance, as the performance
expectations implicit in hiring an active manager cause expected costs of
incentive compensation to exceed anticipated payments from a traditional
asset-based fee arrangement. While the concept of incentive compensation
structures for active managers of marketable securities carries a great deal
of theoretical appeal, the limitations of real-world arrangements reduce the
effectiveness of incentive schemes in causing fund managers to behave as
principals.
Investment management fees, whether asset-based or incentive-
oriented, represent a heavily scrutinized term in most contract negotiations,
with investors seeking the lowest possible fee burden along with a “most-
favored-client” clause ensuring advantageous treatment in the future.
Beneath the open, honest discussion concerning marketable equity fee
arrangements lie hidden soft dollar payments, representing old-fashioned
kickbacks designed to increase investment advisor cash flow at the direct
expense of investor clients.
Soft Dollars


=== PAGE 324 ===
The history of soft dollars provides a worrisome tale. Prior to May 1, 1975,
Wall Street operated under a system of fixed commissions that set rates far
above the costs of executing trades. Competitive forces caused brokerage
firms to circumvent the fixed prices, by providing rebates to favored
customers in the form of soft dollars. Soft dollars, in essence a kickback
from broker to trader, funded the purchase of both investment-related and
noninvestment-related goods and services.
Think about the implications of soft-dollar trades for investors. Paying
inflated commissions to trade securities, for whatever purpose, reduces
investment returns. The reduction in return comes straight from the
investor’s pocket. The benefit, in the form of goods and services, accrues
directly to the fund manager. Because the costs of soft-dollar goods and
services would otherwise have come from the fund’s management fee, soft
dollars represent nothing other than a well-disguised increase in
management fees. Wall Street benefits at the investor’s expense.
A T. Rowe Price disclosure document, dated March 1, 2004, describes
the soft-dollar game. “[U]nder certain conditions, higher brokerage
commissions may be paid in return for brokerage and research services….
[S]uch services may include computers and related hardware. T. Rowe Price
also allocates brokerage for research services which are available for
cash…. [T]he expenses of T. Rowe Price could be materially increased if it
attempted to generate additional information through its own staff. To the
extent that research services of value are provided by brokers or dealers, T.
Rowe Price is relieved of expenses it might otherwise bear.” Investors learn
of T. Rowe Price’s soft-dollar policies through carefully constructed, legally
correct prose buried on Chapter 4 of an infrequently read disclosure
document. Even though T. Rowe Price presumably satisfies legal
requirements with its disclosure, the firm compromises investor interests
with its soft-dollar usage.
After May Day 1975, when the SEC abolished the system of fixed
commissions, the raison d’être for soft dollars vanished. Price competition
would set brokerage commission rates. Under-the-table kickbacks could
disappear. Unfortunately for investors, fund managers realized that soft
dollars transferred research-related expenses from their account
(management fee income) to the investors’ account (trading expenses). As a


=== PAGE 325 ===
result, the money management industry enthusiastically defended the use of
soft dollars.
Instead of banning soft dollars, in 1975 Congress created a safe harbor
for their use under Section 28(e) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Perverting a piece of legislation originally designed to protect the investing
public, Congress bowed to pressure from Wall Street and explicitly allowed
fund managers to deplete investor assets, legitimizing soft dollars by
instructing the SEC to define appropriate use. Why do market participants
tolerate the inefficiencies involved in paying inflated prices for trading
securities and then receiving rebates in the form of goods and services? The
answer lies in the lack of transparency of the process, which allows money
managers to profit in an opaque manner. Were the soft-dollar charges as
transparent as the highly visible management fees, the investment
management industry would have no use for soft dollars.
When the Securities and Exchange Commission examined the soft-
dollar issue in the mid 1980s, the commission not only missed an
opportunity to eliminate the scourge of soft dollars, it actually expanded the
epidemic. In wonderfully bureaucratic prose, the SEC noted that its 1986
release addressed “[i]ndustry difficulty in applying the restrictive standards”
on soft-dollar usage by “adopting a broader definition of ‘brokerage and
research services.’” In other words, if the restrictions bind, loosen the
constraints. The SEC’s 1986 soft-dollar regulations favored the advisor over
the advisee.
SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt described soft dollar conflicts in a
February 15, 1995 Wall Street Journal article: “Soft-dollar arrangements
can create substantial conflicts of interest between an advisor and its clients.
For example, advisors may cause their clients to pay excessive commission
rates, or may overtrade their clients’ accounts simply to satisfy soft-dollar
obligations. Soft-dollar arrangements may also result in inferior executions
when advisors direct trades to the wrong broker to satisfy a soft-dollar
obligation.”39
To ameliorate conflicts surrounding brokerage activity, in February
1995, the SEC proposed a new rule under the Investment Advisors Act of
1940 that would require investment managers to disclose the services they
receive for brokerage commissions. The report would list the twenty


=== PAGE 326 ===
brokers to which the advisor directed the largest amounts of commissions
during the previous year, the top three execution-only brokers, the
aggregate amount of commissions directed by the advisor to each broker,
and the average commission rate paid to each broker. The disclosure would
permit a client to assess the costs and benefits of the soft-dollar services that
the advisor receives, and, consequently, whether the client should attempt to
limit the advisor’s use of soft-dollar brokers. Unfortunately, no action
resulted from the 1995 SEC rule proposal.
In spite of Chairman Levitt’s public concerns about soft dollars, the
SEC again failed to protect mutual-fund investors in 1998. The regulator’s
Inspection Report dryly notes “the widespread use of soft dollars,” as
“almost all advisors obtain products and services other than pure execution
from broker-dealers and use client commissions to pay for those products
and services.” The report recognizes that “advisors using soft dollars face a
conflict of interest between their need to obtain research and their clients’
interest in paying the lowest commission rate available and obtaining the
best possible execution.” The report details instance after instance of
questionable use and outright abuse of soft dollars, including payment “for
office rent and equipment, cellular phone services and personal expenses,
employee salaries, marketing expenses, legal fees, hotels and car rental
costs.” Wall Street’s definition of research bears little correspondence to
Merriam-Webster’s.
In spite of the fundamental, irreconcilable conflict of interest in soft-
dollar use and in spite of the long litany of soft-dollar abuse, the 1998
Inspection Report concludes only that the SEC “should reiterate and
provide additional guidance, consider adopting recordkeeping requirements,
require more meaningful disclosure and encourage firms to adopt internal
controls.” Instead of protecting investor interests, the SEC defended Wall
Street’s gravy train.
While the substance of the 1998 Inspection Report argued for abolition,
the SEC wimped out. Faced with a concerted lobbying effort by interested
parties—including investment managers, Wall Street firms, and the
normally sensible trade association of research analysts—and a lack of
pressure from individual investors, the self-styled “investor’s advocate”
opted to tighten regulation instead of taking the high road of total
eradication. A cynic might argue that the SEC acts on highly visible, easy-


=== PAGE 327 ===
to-understand investor protection issues, while allowing low-profile,
difficult-to-comprehend abuses to remain.
One of the most outrageous “legitimate” uses of soft dollars involves
payoffs made by investment advisors to consulting firms. According to the
1998 SEC report, performance attribution services constitute “a significant
portion of the total commission dollars used in soft dollar transactions.”40
Obviously, any competent investment manager develops internal
capabilities to understand sources of investment returns, creating evaluation
mechanisms specific to the firm’s particular approach to markets.
Purchasing performance attribution from consultants serves simply to line
the pockets of the consulting firm at the expense of the investment
manager’s clients. Presumably, the consulting firm receiving the payoff
places the investment management firm in a favored position when making
manager recommendations. While investment advisors may wish to
improve their standing by purchasing useless information from consulting
firms, using client assets for the purpose turns inanity to ignominy.
Some investment managers need so much assistance in evaluating
performance that they purchase reports from a variety of consultants. The
SEC study cites a large institutional advisor that “directed $882,000 in
client commissions to pay for 13 separate performance analyses.”
According to a report in Pensions and Investments, J&W Seligman & Co., a
money management firm with $24.3 billion under management, engaged
seven consulting firms to provide performance attribution reports, using
client assets to fund the purchase through soft dollars.41 By paying
substantial sums to Callan Associates ($79,000), Evaluation Associates
($100,000), Frank Russell ($26,789), Madison Portfolio Consultants
($17,500), SEI Corporation ($10,000), Wellesley Group ($52,500), and
Yanni-Bilkey Investment Consulting ($25,000), J&W Seligman no doubt
expects favorable treatment in the next search conducted by the
compromised consultants. Payoffs dishonor everyone involved.
Beyond the “legitimate” use of soft dollars to “curry favor with the
consultant in his rankings and recommendations of advisors,” nearly 30
percent of investment advisors employ soft dollars for “non-research
products and services.” The purchases, which fall outside of the safe harbor,
include use of soft dollars for office rent, equipment, marketing expenses,


=== PAGE 328 ===
phone services, and salaries. The SEC observed that “virtually all of the
advisors that obtained non research products and services had failed to
provide meaningful disclosure of such practices to their clients.”42 Aside
from using an illegitimate source of funds for legitimate business expenses,
many advisors stepped over another line by diverting funds for personal
use, including purchase of travel, entertainment, theatre tickets, limousine
services, interior design, Internet website design and construction, and
computer hardware and software. In the most flagrant abuse of soft dollars,
investment advisors defrauded clients by directing “funds ostensibly for
verbal ‘regional research’ and ‘strategic planning’ to family members of the
advisor’s principal,” by transferring soft dollars through a daisy chain of
companies controlled by the advisor’s president, and by paying “round trip
airfare to Hong Kong for the principal’s son.” Even though soft dollars did
not cause the theft, the opacity of the arrangement facilitated the crimes.
Some clients benefit from a different aspect of the current system of
commission-related activity, taking advantage of the murky character of
directed brokerage. With directed brokerage, plan sponsors cause trades to
be executed by specified brokers, paying higher than market commission
rates. A portion of the above-market rate flows back to the plan sponsor in
the form of cash rebates or investment-related goods and services. Two
factors drive directed-brokerage activity—directed-brokerage investors gain
an advantage at the expense of clients not directing brokerage, and fund
sponsors use rebates from directed brokerage to purchase goods and
services unavailable through normal procurement channels.
Investment advisors commonly aggregate trades for a number of
separate account clients, allocating shares to accounts on a pro rata basis. If
one client requests that brokerage be directed to a particular securities firm,
in order to receive a cash rebate, that client accrues an unfair benefit
relative to other clients. In fact, the client who “steps out” of the aggregated
trade likely benefits implicitly from all of the brokerage conducted by the
investment advisor at the designated firm. Such arrangements exist only as
long as they remain hidden from view. If disclosed, disadvantaged clients
would demand fair and equitable treatment.
Some investors, particularly in political or corporate environments, fail
to obtain sufficient direct support for investment management operations.


=== PAGE 329 ===
To augment direct appropriations, investments staff sometimes employ
directed-brokerage and soft-dollar programs, generating resources outside
regular appropriations or operational channels.
Appearing before a Department of Labor Working Group on Soft
Dollars and Commission Recapture, the former director of the New Jersey
Division of Investment openly testified that “he utilizes soft dollars to pay
for needed administrative expenses,” since “he does not receive sufficient
funding from the New Jersey State Legislature.” In fact, the former director
urged that “the current interpretation of ‘research’ should be expanded to
include travel and hotel expenses.”43
Soft dollars provide a convenient mechanism for the New Jersey
Division of Investment to circumvent constraints imposed by the state
legislature, allowing the investment operation to thwart the intent of New
Jersey’s elected representatives.
In April 2007, SEC Chairman Christopher Cox added his voice to the
chorus calling for soft-dollar reform. In a speech to the Mutual Fund
Directors Forum, Cox asserted that:
Soft dollars can serve as an incentive for fund managers to disregard
their best execution obligations, and also to trade portfolio securities
inappropriately in order to earn credits for research and brokerage.
Soft dollars also represent a lot of investors’ hard cash, even though
it isn’t reported that way. The total of soft dollars runs into the
billions each year for all investment funds in the United States.
An agency focused on ensuring full disclosure to investors has to
be very concerned about this, because soft dollars make it more
difficult for investors to understand what’s going on with their
money. Hard dollars eventually end up being reported as part of the
management fee the fund charges its investors. But soft dollars
provide a way for funds to lower their apparent fees—even though,
in the end, investors pay for the expense anyway.
The very concept of soft dollars may be at odds with clarity in
describing fees and costs to investors. The 30-year-old statutory safe
harbor, in Section 28(e) of the Exchange Act, was probably thought
to be a useful legislative compromise when it was packaged with the


=== PAGE 330 ===
abolition of fixed commissions. But surely in enacting Section 28(e)
Congress meant to promote competition in research, not to create
conflicts of interest by permitting commission dollars to be spent in
ways that benefit investment managers instead of their investor
clients.44
In May 2007, SEC Chairman Cox called for repeal or substantial revision of
the safe harbor that protects soft-dollar arrangements between broker
dealers and money managers. Cox noted the current system produced a
“witch’s brew of hidden fees, conflicts of interest and complexity in
application that is at odds with investors’ best interests.”45
While the SEC attempts to reform soft-dollar practices, the question
remains—why do soft dollars exist? Powerful market participants in the
brokerage community benefit from the inherent murkiness of soft-dollar
transactions. Third party providers of soft-dollar-eligible goods and services
maintain a strong vested interest in supporting the current system.
Investment advisors employing soft dollars increase net income by
transferring a portion of investment management costs to clients.
Soft-dollar activity flies in the face of reasonable governance.
Investment advisors employ soft dollars to pay off consulting firms and
increase investment management revenues, relying on the technique’s
opacity to hide from view. Fund managers incur frictional costs to pursue
initiatives with directed commissions for which “hard” dollars are
unavailable, frustrating the intentions of fund fiduciaries. Soft dollars and
directed brokerage, the slimy underbelly of the brokerage world, ought to
be banned.
Compensation Arrangements for Nontraditional Assets
Fee arrangements in the nontraditional asset arena typically include some
form of profits interest. In spite of important limitations, when compared to
typical marketable security deal terms, alternative asset deal structures
better align interests of fund managers and fund providers, as the profits
interest focuses manager attention on generating investment gains. Large
co-investment by managers provides the strongest force for creating parallel


=== PAGE 331 ===
interests, causing the manager to share in investment losses as well as in
investment gains. Forcing managers to pay attention to the downside of an
investment mitigates concerns about the one-way nature of profit sharing
options.
Without substantial levels of co-investment, deal structures in the
alternative arena encourage investment managers to expose investor assets
to risk, as the managers typically receive compensation in the form of an
option-like profits interest. Facing a “heads I win, tails you lose”
arrangement, managers respond by adopting an agent’s perspective,
focusing on achieving personal gains that may or may not correspond to
generating risk-adjusted investment returns for the providers of capital.
A particularly troublesome problem results from granting investment
managers a profits interest without specifying an appropriate benchmark or
hurdle rate. By paying 20 percent of gains after return of capital, investors
give asset managers a windfall in the form of a profit participation in
market-generated gains over which the manager exercises no control. In
creating structures without a reasonable measure of the opportunity cost of
funds, investors diminish the likelihood of realizing superior risk-adjusted
returns.
Alternative asset compensation arrangements consist of fee income,
generally calculated on portfolio value or committed capital, and incentive
schemes, generally calculated as a portion of investment gains. In the rarely
achieved ideal world, fees offset ordinary costs of pursuing the investment
business, while profits interests create incentives for adding value to the
process. All too frequently, fees exceed the level required to cover costs,
becoming a profit center, and profit participations cover more than value
added, rewarding (or penalizing) managers for results beyond their control.
Fee Income
Reasonable fee income provides sufficient revenue to cover a firm’s
overhead, allowing investors to run the business comfortably. Investment
principals deserve fair salaries, nicely appointed offices, and sufficient
resources to structure and manage the portfolio. Ideally, investors would
discuss with fund managers the level of resources required to operate the
firm, setting a budget sufficient to meet the agreed-upon needs. In practice,


=== PAGE 332 ===
few firms take a budgeted approach to setting fees. Most firms maintain
industry-standard fee percentages as fund sizes grow and generate
enormous cash flows simply from raising ever larger funds.
Deal fees, paid to private fund managers upon consummation of an
acquisition, serve to line the pockets of fund managers at the direct expense
of investors. Typically found in the leveraged buyout arena, such fees
motivate firms to do deals and provide an unnecessary addition to the more-
than-generous compensation package represented by management fees and
carried interests. Fees in excess of those required to run the business drive a
wedge between the interests of investors and fund managers, subtly shifting
the manager’s focus to maintaining fees at the expense of generating
returns.
Profits Interests
Incentive compensation in the form of a share of gains generated by fund
investments provides a powerful tool to motivate fund managers. A fair and
effective arrangement splits the value added by the fund manager between
the manager and the investor. Both parties deserve to share in incremental
gains, since without the manager’s work there would be no value added,
while without the investor’s capital there would be no deal. Achieving a
hurdle rate that reflects the investor’s opportunity cost of capital represents
the point at which a fund manager begins to add value. Unfortunately, in
much of the private equity world, hurdles do not exist. By providing profits
interests after return of capital, investors compensate fund managers
inappropriately. Incentive compensation in the form of sharing value added
causes managers to pursue the active investor’s goal of creating risk-
adjusted excess returns.
A particularly egregious deal structure causes investors to pay incentive
compensation to fund managers before the return of invested capital. Under
some private equity arrangements, the investor’s capital account declines by
the amount of management fees paid. If “gains” are calculated off of the
reduced base, fund managers may receive a profits interest on a fund that
fails to return investor capital. At the very least, fund managers ought to
return investor capital before reaping the significant rewards of incentive
compensation.


=== PAGE 333 ===
Fairness demands that investors earn hard hurdles before profit sharing
begins. Hard hurdles represent rates of return that investors realize before
fund managers participate in gains, with only profits above the hurdle rate
subject to sharing. Soft hurdles, a popular marketing scheme, allow fund
managers to “catch up” after exceeding the hurdle rate, providing little
value for investors (except in the case where a manager produces truly
miserable returns).
Identifying an appropriate hurdle rate poses a tricky problem, since
alternative markets lack a ready benchmark such as the S&P 500 for
marketable domestic equities. In the case of absolute return, the cost of
funds as expressed by a one-year interest rate provides a reasonable starting
point. Since absolute return managers generally take short duration
positions, measuring investment success relative to short-term interest rates
makes sense. In the case of real assets, where expected returns fall between
bonds (representing a lower risk measure of an institution’s opportunity cost
of funds) and stocks (representing a higher risk measure of opportunity
cost), intermediate-term fixed income returns plus a small premium might
give us an appropriate hurdle. When forming new funds, investors and fund
managers revisit the question of an appropriate hurdle rate in light of
changes in market conditions. For instance, as interest rates moved
downward throughout the 1990s, appropriate real assets hurdle rates
declined from high single digits to mid single digits.
In contrast to reasonable deal structures sometimes available to
investors in absolute return and real assets, investors in venture capital and
leveraged buyouts face generally unattractive partnership terms. By
compensating private equity managers with 20 percent, 25 percent, or 30
percent of every dollar generated after return of capital, standard profit
sharing arrangements fail to consider the opportunity cost of capital. At the
very least, private managers ought to return a money market rate before
collecting a profits interest. The long-term return on a marketable equity
benchmark provides a hurdle rate more appropriate to the risk of private
equity. In fact, the higher risk inherent in venture capital and leveraged
buyout investments suggests using a multiple of long-term equity returns as
a threshold for benchmarking private equity funds.
Risk-adjusted marketable security hurdle rates for private investments
avoid the problem of compensating (or penalizing) fund managers for


=== PAGE 334 ===
market moves that they cannot control. In the bull market of the 1980s and
1990s, buyout managers “earned” 20 percent of the profits on gains
attributable to stock-market-induced valuation increases. In a reasonable
world, investors might compensate private managers with a profits interest
in returns exceeding some premium over long-run historical results from
marketable equity investments, implying a mid-teens hurdle rate.
Fair incentive compensation schemes for alternative asset managers
face nearly insurmountable obstacles. Under the current conditions of
overwhelming demand for high quality groups, investors lack power to
influence terms, facing the choice of accepting the standard deal or walking
away. Investors hoping to encourage fund managers to behave as principals
look to other aspects of deal structure.
Absolute Return Investment Vehicles
Absolute return managers, operating in a marketable securities
environment, generally allow investors to withdraw assets and to make
contributions on a reasonably frequent basis. Although partnership terms
generally restrict the timing and size of inflows and outflows, stable
investors face the possibility of incurring costs created by other investors’
cash moving in and out. Cash contributions to an existing partnership dilute
the interest of existing investors. By buying into an existing commingled
fund, new investors participate in an established portfolio without paying
transactions costs to establish positions. Cash withdrawals pose the same
free rider problem as departing monies fail to bear the full burden of trading
costs required to raise the cash necessary to compensate departing investors.
A more significant problem arises when cash outflows disrupt a
manager’s investment strategy. During the market panic in late 1998, many
hedge fund managers worried about the magnitude of year-end withdrawals.
The threat of potentially large withdrawals posed a dilemma, as on the one
hand managers needed to prepare to accommodate departing investor
demands while on the other hand asset sales at depressed prices harm the
portfolio. The confluence of tough market conditions and concern regarding
client withdrawals caused many managers to raise cash by selling assets
trading at temporarily depressed prices, impairing results for the manager
and steadfast investors alike.


=== PAGE 335 ===
Fund managers solve the free rider problem by allocating costs
appropriately to entering and exiting investors. In the case of easily
measured transactions costs, managers simply assess entry and exit fees,
resulting in a fair allocation of costs. To meet the objective of distributing
costs fairly, fees must be paid to the fund, not to the manager, as the fees
offset costs incurred by the fund. More complicated procedures address the
issue of allocating less predictable costs, particularly charges from
transactions conducted in markets with poor liquidity. A rough
approximation of fairness results from segregating new investor
contributions, investing the funds, and contributing the resulting assets to
the general portfolio at cost. Even though the package of securities
purchased by the entering investor may not bear precisely the same level of
transactions costs as would trades in existing portfolio securities, if the
manager makes new purchases in markets similar to the existing holdings
the new entrant bears a fair burden. Upon exit, the departing investor
receives a pro rata share of the general portfolio in a segregated account,
incurring the transactions costs associated with the liquidation process and
insulating continuing investors from any adverse impact. By causing
entering and exiting investors to absorb costs related to purchases and sales,
fund managers avoid unfair treatment of existing investors. Most
importantly, the process allows managers to invest assets without regard to
concerns regarding extraordinary withdrawal requests, since departing
investors simply receive the proceeds of their proportionate share of the
fund.
Private Equity Investment Vehicles
Private equity managers best serve investor interests by focusing undivided
attention on a single investment vehicle. With only one place to conduct
business, managers avoid the inevitable conflicts that arise when managing
multiple funds with non-coincident goals.
For example, if a buyout firm manages an equity pool and a mezzanine
debt pool, tensions arise in pricing transactions. Better pricing on the
mezzanine debt leads to worse results for the equity holders, and vice versa.
Some firms attempt to deal with pricing issues by creating a formula for
determining the terms of mezzanine finance. By pre-specifying the


=== PAGE 336 ===
relationship between the mezzanine coupon level and U.S. Treasury rates,
as well as pre-identifying the size of the equity kicker for the bondholders,
fund managers hope to avoid the tricky issues involved in dividing expected
returns between competing sets of investors.
Because dynamic market conditions constantly alter terms of trade for
various investment tools, formulaic approaches inevitably fail to reflect the
current market. If the formula determines worse-than-market terms for
mezzanine debt, fund managers fail to discharge fiduciary duties to
mezzanine investors. If the formula results in a better-than-market deal,
equity investors suffer. The convenience of controlling a captive mezzanine
fund comes at the cost of a serious conflict between the interests of lenders
and owners. In the event of financial distress, problems become even more
painfully obvious with some members of the firm wearing mezzanine hats
and others wearing equity hats. If equity owners seek forbearance from
lenders, fund managers find themselves in a hopelessly conflicted position.
The best course for bondholders frequently differs from the path preferred
by equity owners, posing a dilemma for even the best intentioned fund
manager. In the case of bankruptcy, the problems worsen as interests clash
in the zero-sum game of allocating value to debt and equity. By creating
and managing multiple funds, managers invite exposure to the crossways
pull of competing interests.
While debt and equity funds provide a dramatic example of tensions
arising from management of multiple funds, complementary activities
create similar types of issues. Criteria that determine which fund receives a
particular transaction, carefully delineated in the fund offering documents,
frequently fail to address subsequent realities, creating messy allocation
issues for fund managers. Perhaps even more important, the fund manager
faces the daily problem of deciding which particular activity will receive
the manager’s time and attention. Because multiple funds contain different
sets of investors with different interests, in choosing which activities to
pursue the fund manager decides which set of investors to serve.
Fund manager investment outside of investment pools deserves careful
scrutiny. Investment principals must avoid doing private deals for their own
account, even if the transactions seem too small, too funky, or otherwise
inappropriate for the institutional fund. Investors deserve the complete
dedication of fund manager investment efforts. Undiluted focus of all


=== PAGE 337 ===
professional energies on the management of a single investment pool forms
an important starting point in serving investment client needs.
KKR’s Deal Structure Flaws
Poorly structured private investment deals often produce dramatically
misaligned interests. The well known buyout firm, Kohlberg, Kravis, &
Roberts (KKR), negotiated partnership terms in its 1993 fund that enriched
the principals regardless of the results for the limited partners. Like
managers of most private equity funds, KKR received a carried interest of
20 percent of the partnership’s profits. Unlike most funds, KKR did not
aggregate investments when calculating the profits interest. That is, KKR
collected 20 percent of the profits on successful deals, with no offset for
losses incurred in failed transactions, creating an incentive to roll the dice.
KKR owned a share of the profits of big wins, but suffered none of the pain
of big losses. In essence, the deal structure encouraged the firm to take
enormous risk by creating option-like payoffs for the general partners
through use of extreme financial or operating leverage.
KKR’s agreement with the limited partners called for a management fee
of 1.5 percent of assets, typical of leveraged buyout partnerships. Such
management fees, designed to cover the cost of running a buyout fund’s
business, became a profit center for KKR because of the enormous size of
funds under supervision. Not satisfied with excessive management fees,
KKR collected deal fees for consummating transactions, monitoring fees
for managing positions and investment banking fees for subsequent capital
market transactions. The overly generous management fees, deal fees,
monitoring fees, and investment banking fees drive a wedge between the
interests of the general partners (more is better) and the limited partners
(less is more). Contrast this with the terms of Warren Buffett’s original
partnership, in which he charged no management fee, believing that he
should only profit if his co-investors profited!46
KKR’s August 1995 purchase of Bruno’s illustrates the misaligned
interests. The $1.2 billion transaction, which included an equity investment
of $250 million, involved the acquisition of a chain of supermarkets
headquartered in Mississippi. KKR charged an acquisition fee of $15
million, which exceeded the general partners’ investment by a significant


=== PAGE 338 ===
margin. Pro-rated management fees, charged on committed capital,
amounted to $3.75 million on an annual basis. The monitoring fee
consumed an additional $1 million annually. Moreover, in 1997 KKR
charged Bruno’s investment banking fees of $800,000. In exchange for
financing the purchase and paying tens of millions of dollars of fees, in
February 1998, the limited partners lost their entire investment when
Bruno’s declared bankruptcy, filing for Chapter XI.
Properly structured deals cause general partners and limited partners to
share in both profits and losses. If a managing agent shares only in profits,
incentives to take risk abound. Management fee income that covers only
overhead forces investors to perform before receiving extraordinary profits.
Fees above the basic overhead level represent an undeserved transfer from
limited partners to general partners. The combination of high levels of fee
income and option-like payoff structure allowed KKR to profit
unreasonably on the Bruno’s deal, while the firm’s investors wrote off the
transaction.
Some aspects of the unusually egregious fee structure employed by
KKR disappeared in 1996, when the firm raised a then-market-leading $5.7
billion fund. Pressured by substantial institutional investors, the buyout firm
agreed to aggregate the results of all deals in the fund, offsetting deficits
from losers before taking profits on winners. While KKR’s investors expect
to benefit from the pooling of transaction results, the firm continues to
benefit from extraordinary levels of fee income, ensuring general partner
success regardless of limited partner investment results.
KKR’s fee income in 2006 illustrates the role of fees in the stunning
transfer of wealth from limited partners to general partners. According to
the July 3, 2007 preliminary S-1 filed with the SEC to facilitate KKR’s
proposed IPO, in 2006 the firm received $67 million in monitoring fees and
$273 million in transaction fees. Harvard Business School Professor Josh
Lerner estimates that fund management fees in 2006 amounted to
approximately $350 million.47 KKR’s senior professionals, who reportedly
numbered twenty-five, collected an estimated $690 million in fees simply
for showing up, turning on the lights, and going about their day-to-day
business.


=== PAGE 339 ===
In spite of KKR’s 1996 removal of the deal-by-deal incentive
compensation clause, investors generally exercise little influence over deal
terms, as investment managers hew to an industry standard scale that
provides higher levels of income at lower risk than would a fair
compensation structure. Consider an environment where managers receive
base fees to cover reasonable overhead and earn a portion of excess returns
to provide incentive. Since a majority of market participants fail to beat a
fair risk-adjusted benchmark, most fund managers would face a substantial
decline in income under a fair deal structure.
Because profits interests begin to accrue after return of capital, private
managers collect incentive compensation after investors receive a zero rate
of return. If private managers received a profits interest in gains only above
a risk-adjusted benchmark, based on historical results the overwhelming
number of managers would fail to earn incentive compensation. Because
the investment management industry receives compensation far in excess of
levels justified by the degree of value created, investors encounter
enormous resistance to institution of reasonable deal structures.
Unfortunately, when altering the terms of the trade, investors face the
challenge of making industry-wide changes, since manager-by-manager
change introduces the potential for instability. If a single private equity
manager promoted a fair deal structure, compensation for that firm’s
principals would fall far short of industry standards. Personnel at the firm
could cross the street, work for a private fund operating under the unfair
profit sharing regime, thereby increasing personal income dramatically. The
innovative private fund, offering a fair deal, retains only those principals
without other alternatives.
Investors find terms of trade in the private equity arena moving away
from fairness. Fees on multibillion-dollar buyout funds generate tens of
millions of dollars per annum, far in excess of amounts necessary to fund
reasonable levels of partnership operating expenses. Buyout fund profits
interests take 20 percent of returns created by the stock market’s upward
bias, not to mention 20 percent of returns produced by highly leveraged
capital structures. After adjusting for fees, profits interests, and the risk, no
excess return remains for the overwhelming number of capital providers.
Venture capital investors fare little better. In the past, the venture
community fell into a neat three-tier structure with Kleiner Perkins atop the


=== PAGE 340 ===
hierarchy earning a 30 percent profits interest, a handful of superb firms
receiving a 25 percent carry, and the rest of the industry taking home 20
percent of gains. The late 1990s Internet mania turned many solid venture
capitalists into bull market geniuses, causing them to demand an increase in
compensation from 20 percent of profits to 25 percent or even 30 percent.
While a few making the move deserve inclusion in the elite ranks of the
industry, most simply say “it’s the market” or “we need to do it for
competitive reasons.” Such top-of-the-market increases in compensation
persisted through the subsequent period of weak venture returns, creating a
pattern of one-way ratcheting of deal terms against investor interests.
A recent study by two Wharton School academics, Andrew Metrick and
Ayako Yasuda, produced some startling results regarding the relationship
between fee income and profits interests. The authors examined detailed
records of 238 funds raised between 1992 and 2006. Based on their
modeling of the partnership characteristics, “about 60 percent of expected
revenue comes from fixed-revenue components which are not sensitive to
performance.”48 The conclusion that the majority of general partner
compensation takes the form of fee income calls in question the basic
private equity partnership structure.
Michael Jensen, professor emeritus at the Harvard Business School,
expressed concerns about private equity compensation schemes in a
September 2007 interview with the New York Times’s Gretchen Morgenson.
Jensen, “the man whom many consider to be the intellectual father of
private equity,” “deplores the newfangled fees that private equity firms are
levying on their clients.” Jensen said, “I can predict without a shred of
doubt that these fees are going to end up reducing the productivity of the
model. And it creates another wedge between the outsiders and insiders,
which is very, very serious. People are doing this out of some short-run
focus on increasing revenues, and not paying attention to what the strengths
of the model are.”49 Investors in private equity fare best with smaller, more
entrepreneurial fund managers that benefit less from fees and more from
profit participation.
Negotiating Change


=== PAGE 341 ===
While long established practices limit the ability of investors to negotiate
fair deal terms, in the early 1990s the real estate industry presented an
opportunity for radical restructuring. After recklessly throwing staggering
amounts of capital into real estate in the 1980s, institutions withdrew almost
completely from the market after the turn-of-the-decade collapse in prices.
Those few investors interested in committing funds faced a host of
unattractive investment management alternatives.
Large fee-driven advisors dominated institutional real estate activity in
the 1980s. Firms such as AEW, Copley, Heitman, JMB, LaSalle, RREEF,
and TCW amassed billions of dollars in assets, driven by the steady stream
of acquisition fees, management fees, and disposition fees. Not surprisingly,
the real estate advisory community adopted a laser-like focus on initiating,
maintaining and enhancing flows of fee income, often neglecting even to
consider the notion of generating investment returns for clients.
JMB’s Fee Bonanza
Headquartered in Chicago and named for Robert Judelson, Judd Malkin,
and Neil Bluhm, JMB typified the fee orientation of the 1980s advisory
crowd. Not content to collect flows of income based on the fair value of
client assets, the firm went to extraordinary lengths to collect its fees even
as portfolio assets withered in the 1990s real estate collapse.
Exhibiting nearly unbelievable greed, JMB retained underwater
positions simply to collect fees from clients. In July 1986, the firm acquired
Argyle Village Square, a retail property in Jacksonville, Florida, for $22
million as part of a portfolio of properties held in a commingled fund,
Endowment and Foundation Realty—JMB II. Encumbered by a mortgage
of $12.4 million, the property generated fees for JMB of 1.25 percent on the
gross value of the asset, equivalent to nearly 2.3 percent on the original
equity investment.
By 1992, Argyle Village Square declined in value to the extent that the
property’s mortgage exceeded its market price. The anchor tenant, discount
department store Zayre’s, vacated its space, dramatically impairing the
property’s future prospects. Instead of turning the shopping center over to
the lender, JMB held the asset on its books at zero equity value, continuing
to collect fees from investors based on the gross value of the property. With


=== PAGE 342 ===
a cash return of 1.1 percent (after debt service and before fees), Argyle
Village Square’s fee of 1.25 percent exceeded the property’s income. To add
injury to insult, JMB used investor cash flow from other assets to make up
the difference, ensuring the continued flow of the full level of fees to the
firm. In spite of repeated requests from investors to dispose of Argyle
Village and stop the diversion of portfolio cash flow to pay fees, JMB
retained the shopping center and piggily fed at the trough of investor assets.
In the “largest real estate acquisition ever,” JMB’s 1987 purchase of
Cadillac Fairview, a collection of Canadian retailing properties, generated a
fee bonanza for the firm on a stupendous scale.50 Continuing its practice of
assessing fees on the gross value of transactions, JMB’s initial fee
amounted to one percent of the C$6.8 billion deal, representing a load of
3.4 percent on original equity contributions of approximately C$2.0 billion.
JMB included in the gross transaction value a portfolio of assets worth
approximately C$560 million already under contract for sale, causing the
firm to “earn” C$5.6 million for acquiring and immediately selling assets
with absolutely no potential to benefit investors.
JMB’s “feeing” frenzy continued with annual asset management fees of
0.5 percent per year on gross fair market value (equivalent to 1.7 percent of
initial equity), participation fees of 1.75 percent per year on cash flow and
capital proceeds, and disposition fees of 1.0 percent on gross proceeds (with
a parenthetical reminder in the Offering Memorandum that gross proceeds
“includes indebtedness,” in case the investor forgot).
In addition to initial fees, annual fees, participation fees, and disposition
fees, JMB retained the right to provide property management, leasing,
insurance brokerage, and other services with compensation negotiated on an
“arms-length” basis. Not satisfied with the staggering array of fee-
generating opportunities, JMB contracted to receive incentive fees of 15
percent of profits after providing a 9 percent simple annual return to
investors.
Unfortunately for JMB and its co-investors in Cadillac Fairview, in the
tough environment of the early 1990s, the overpriced, overleveraged buyout
suffered. Notwithstanding an additional 1992 equity contribution of C$700
million, by 1994 interests representing the C$2.7 billion of equity
contributed by investors traded at 20 cents to 25 cents on the dollar. As


=== PAGE 343 ===
pension investors from California, Massachusetts, Illinois, and Iowa
watched the relentless decline in asset value, JMB continued to collect its
management fees.
Responding to outrage over the real estate advisor’s insulation from the
failure of the Canadian mega-deal, JMB voluntarily reduced its annual fee
from $30 million to $25 million, while noting that the fee compensated the
firm for advising Cadillac Fairview, not the investors! Judd Malkin
highlighted the lack of coincidence of interest with his investors, observing
that “[i]f I cut my fees by one-half, it still doesn’t change their return.”51
Succumbing to the inevitable consequence of too much debt and too
little cash flow, in December 1994, Cadillac Fairview filed for protection
from creditors in Canadian bankruptcy court. In spite of the failure of the
company and massive losses by its investors, JMB aggressively sought to
retain the gravy train, suing Cadillac Fairview for C$225 million, of which
C$180 million represented the future stream of fees for advising the
company on its Canadian properties. JMB settled the fee claim for C$22.5
million in 1995.
In spite of the massive failure of Cadillac Fairview and JMB’s
outrageous treatment of investors, Neil Bluhm raised another institutional
fund, Walton Street Capital, in 1997. The original fund paved the way for a
series of funds, which as of 2007 boasted $3.5 billion of aggregate equity
commitments. Bluhm’s asset-gathering ability and fee-charging acumen
created a net worth sufficient to merit a rank of 215 on the 2006 Forbes’ list
of the 400 wealthiest Americans.52
While JMB may represent the worst of the fee-driven excesses, in the
1980s all major real estate advisors focused on collecting fees, not
generating investment returns. Institutions hoping to exploit real estate
opportunities in the early 1990s faced a collection of discredited advisors
operating with fundamentally flawed deal structures. Fortunately, an almost
total withdrawal of capital from the real estate market provided substantial
negotiating leverage to investors willing to commit funds to the cash-
starved asset class.
 


=== PAGE 344 ===
The capital drought of the early 1990s placed investors and real estate fund
managers on equal footing, allowing negotiation of fair deal terms.
Providers of funds negotiated management fees sufficient to cover
overhead, but insufficient to create a profit center. Investors obtained a hard
hurdle, forcing managers to provide a fair return before earning a profits
interest. In cases where real estate managers enjoyed a substantial net
worth, general partner commitments to funds amounted to tens of millions
of dollars, often exceeding the contributions made by many of the limited
partners. When managers exhibited more modest means, recourse loans
from the partnership provided funds for the manager’s co-investment.
The dearth of capital in the early 1990s created an unusual opportunity
for investors to alter the compensation arrangements for real estate
investing. Moving from the dysfunctional fee-driven agency structure of the
1980s to a well-aligned investment-return-oriented principal structure in the
1990s promoted the interests of investors and fund managers alike.
While the return of capital to real estate investing in the late 1990s
eroded some of the deal structure gains, many managers chose to continue
employing principal-oriented structures even when presented with rich fee-
driven opportunities. Aside from purely economic considerations, the
loyalty engendered by previous successful pursuit of mutually rewarding
investment activities contributed materially to the decision to continue
working with the existing structure. The dislocations in the real estate
markets contributed to long lasting changes in institutional deal terms.
CONCLUSION
Market efficiency creates substantial hurdles for investors pursuing active
management strategies, causing most to fail even to match results of market
benchmarks. Although trying to beat the market proves tough and costly,
fiduciaries frequently accept active manager claims at face value, attribute
investment success to skill (not luck), and fail to adjust results for risk. In
the face of active management obstacles, market players respond to the
thrills and excitement generated by playing a game with scores tallied in the
millions, and even billions, explaining the nearly universal pursuit of active
strategies by institutional investors.


=== PAGE 345 ===
Thoughtful investors approach active management opportunities with
great skepticism, starting with the presumption that managers exhibit no
skill. Historical performance numbers deserve careful scrutiny, with astute
observers mindful of the part good fortune plays in successful track records.
Odds of winning the active management game increase when committing
funds to managers possessing an “edge” likely to produce superior
performance in extremely competitive markets.
Selecting the right people to manage assets poses the single biggest
challenge to fiduciaries, since integrity, intelligence, and energy influence
portfolio outcomes in the most fundamental manner. The actions of external
managers contribute not only to investment performance, but also to the
reputation and public perception of the institution itself, forcing fiduciaries
to embrace extremely high standards in manager selection.
Appropriate organizational structure plays a part in successful execution
of investment programs by ensuring sufficient alignment of interest
between the institutional fund and the external advisor. Independent
investment advisors with carefully structured economic incentives stand the
greatest chance of producing high risk-adjusted returns, as appropriate
incentives cause managers to place institutional goals ahead of personal
agendas. While thoughtful deal terms and sensible organizational attributes
contribute to the likelihood of success, even the most carefully constructed
arrangements fail when implemented by the wrong people.
Entrepreneurial firms provide the greatest likelihood of dealing
successfully with ever changing market dynamics, ultimately increasing the
chances of delivering superior investment returns. Unfortunately, successful
firms contain the seeds of their own destruction, as size inhibits
performance and age saps energy. Vigilant fiduciaries stand ready to cull the
old and tired, while identifying the new and energetic.
Deal structure plays a critical role in shaping the behavior of investment
managers and determining the fairness of investment gain and loss
allocations. By encouraging asset managers to behave as principals,
appropriate deal terms cause investors to seek investment gains and de-
emphasize return-reducing streams of fee income.
Typical compensation arrangements cause asset manager income to
depend on factors beyond the investment advisor’s control. As bull market
gains inflate marketable security portfolios and increase private fund assets,


=== PAGE 346 ===
managers benefit through enhanced management fees and profits interests.
Bear market losses impose costs unrelated to manager actions. In the case
of both marketable and private deal structures, investment advisors’
compensation waxes and wanes with the market’s fortunes, resulting in
earnings streams not directly tied to the level of value created.
By operating under asset-based compensation arrangements that fail to
consider value-added measures, investment managers lose focus on return
generation, emphasizing instead a stay-in-business strategy designed to
protect streams of fee income. Partly as a consequence of poor deal
structure, standard compensation arrangements allocate investment gains
and losses unfairly, frequently enriching the investment manager while
generating substandard risk-adjusted returns to providers of funds.
Appropriate deal terms serve to encourage fund managers to behave as
principals, causing them to pursue gains while avoiding losses. Structural
characteristics that play an important role in aligning investment manager
and investor interests include the nature of the investment vehicle, level of
fees, form of incentive compensation, and size of manager co-investment.
By seeking investment arrangements that motivate managers to pursue high
levels of risk-adjusted portfolio gains, investors encourage a focus on
generating satisfactory investment results.
Investors hoping to beat the odds by playing the game of active
management face daunting obstacles ranging from the efficiency in pricing
of most marketable securities to the burden of extraordinary fees in most
alternative asset investment vehicles. Only by identifying extremely high
quality people operating in an appropriately structured organization do
active investors create an opportunity to add value to the investment
process. Painstaking identification, careful structuring, and patient
implementation of investment management relationships provide essential
underpinnings to an active management program.
OceanofPDF.com


=== PAGE 347 ===
10
Investment Process
Structuring a portfolio consistent with fundamental investment tenets
requires a governance process that produces an appropriate policy portfolio,
avoids counterproductive market timing, and identifies effective investment
management relationships. One of the most critical portfolio management
decisions concerns the choice between(a) developing an organization with
the capability of selecting high quality active managers, and (b) deploying a
strategy with an emphasis on bare bones passive vehicles. While choosing
an active approach broadens the asset class opportunity set and holds the
promise of market-beating returns, active strategies demand a significant
commitment of resources. Those institutions that engage in active
management without proper support face the unpalatable prospect of
generating disappointing results for themselves and creating opportunities
for better prepared investors.
Two important tenets of investment management—contrarian thinking
and long-term orientation—pose challenges for governance of endowment
funds. Because large bureaucratic organizations invariably use groups of
people (investment committees) to oversee other groups of people
(investment staff), consensus-building behavior permeates the investment
process. Unless carefully managed, group dynamics frequently thwart
contrarian activities and impose shorter than optimal time horizons.
Creating a governance process that encourages long-term, independent,
contrarian thinking represents a critical undertaking for endowed
institutions.
John Maynard Keynes, in The General Theory, describes the difficulties
inherent in group investment decision making: “Finally it is the long-term
investor, he who most promotes the public interest, who will in practice
come in for most criticism, wherever investment funds are managed by


=== PAGE 348 ===
committees or boards or banks. For it is the essence of his behavior that he
should be eccentric, unconventional, and rash in the eyes of average
opinion. If he is successful, that will only confirm the general belief in his
rashness; and if in the short run he is unsuccessful, which is very likely, he
will not receive much mercy. Worldly wisdom teaches that it is better for
reputation to fail conventionally than to succeed unconventionally.”1 The
challenges facing an institution attempting to structure effective governance
processes center on exercising appropriate fiduciary oversight, while
encouraging “eccentric, unconventional, and rash” behavior.
ACTIVE versus PASSIVE MANAGEMENT
Perhaps, the most important distinguishing characteristic of an investor
concerns the ability (or lack thereof) to make high quality active
management decisions. Skillful active investors sensibly employ a broader
set of asset class alternatives, enriching opportunities for portfolio
diversification. Adept active investors pursue market-beating strategies in
marketable securities, potentially enhancing asset class returns. The active
investor enjoys the greatest opportunity to create and implement portfolios
with high potential returns and low prospective risks.
The surest path to making effective active management decisions comes
from engaging a highly qualified staff of professionals committed to serving
the interests of the investment fund. A dedicated staff supplies the resources
necessary to identify the exceedingly rare group of managers able to add
value in the investment process. In addition, hiring a group of individuals to
manage a particular investment fund reduces the severity of the principal-
agent conflicts that pervade the money management industry, as the staff
serves as a strong advocate for the institution’s interests.
Investors without the resources to make well-informed active
management judgments sensibly limit portfolio choices to passively
managed, broad-based asset classes of marketable securities, including
domestic equity, foreign developed equity, emerging market equity, real
estate investment trusts, U.S. Treasury bonds and U.S. Treasury Inflation-
Protected Securities. The intensely competitive investment world inevitably
punishes casual attempts to beat the market, leading the rational resource-


=== PAGE 349 ===
constrained investor to employ a manageable set of low-cost passive
alternatives.*
Certain asset classes require active management skills if the investor
hopes to realize an attractive risk-adjusted outcome: absolute return, real
assets, and private equity. In each case, no market exists for the investor to
buy; active management proves critical to producing acceptable results. In
each case, fee arrangements—the combination of an asset-based
management fee and a profits interest—create a substantial hurdle for
investment success and provide dramatic punishment for investors who fail.
In each case, in large part because of the generous fee arrangements,
median asset class returns fail to provide satisfactory risk-adjusted returns
to providers of capital. In each case, identifying managers with substantial
potential involves a broad range of qualitative and quantitative skills.
Success in absolute return, real assets, and private equity depends critically
on high quality active management decisions.
Aside from allowing investors to effectively use a broader set of asset
classes, a high quality team of professionals enables an institution to seek
market-beating results in the relatively efficiently priced marketable
securities arena. Even though low cost, passive alternatives provide a high
hurdle for active managers, with diligent investigation and a sufficiently
long time horizon, top-notch investment professionals face reasonable
prospects of producing superior active management records.
The role of active management takes center stage in deliberations
regarding the structure of the investment organization and governance of
the investment process. Institutions that create well-staffed, high quaility
investment organizations with effective committee oversight enjoy the
opportunity to employ a broader range of asset classes and exploit an
intriguing set of market inefficiencies. Institutions without substantial staff
resources sensibly follow a strategy limited to passively managed
portfolios. The choice between the active and the passive approaches to
portfolio management carries implications for nearly every aspect of the
investment process.
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT


=== PAGE 350 ===
To produce a high quaility, actively managed portfolio, investment
management organizations require a strong staff overseen by a well-
functioning investment committee. Effective investment committees
provide appropriate oversight while taking care not to impinge on staff
responsibilities. Limiting committee meetings to four per year prevents
trustees from becoming too involved in day-to-day portfolio management
decisions, yet allows staff to receive appropriate guidance from the
committee. By presuming that initiatives come from staff, not from
committee members, responsibility for the nature and direction of the
investment program rests squarely on the shoulders of the investment
office. In short, the investment committee should play the role of a board of
directors for the fund management operation.
Investment Committee
A strong investment committee brings discipline to the endowment
management process. By thoroughly and thoughtfully vetting investment
recommendations, the committee inspires staff to produce ever more
carefully considered proposals. Ideally, committees rarely exercise the
power to reject staff recommendations. If a committee frequently turns
down or revises investment proposals, the staff encounters difficulty in
managing the portfolio. Investment opportunities often require negotiation
of commitments subject to board approval. If the board withholds approval
with any degree of regularity, staff loses credibility in the eyes of the
investment management community. That said, the committee must provide
more than a rubber stamp for staff recommendations. In a well run
organization, committee discussion of investment proposals influences the
direction and nature of future staff initiatives. Effective portfolio
management requires striking a balance between respect for the ultimate
authority of the investment committee and delegation of reasonable
responsibility to the investment staff.
Committee members often provide assistance between meetings,
providing feedback on past actions and suggesting strategies for the future.
Informed give and take elevates the investment dialog, challenging staff and
committee to improve the quality of investment decision making.


=== PAGE 351 ===
Investment committee members should be selected primarily for good
judgment. While no particular background qualifies an individual to serve
on the committee, broad understanding of financial markets proves useful in
overseeing the investment process. Aggregating a collection of investment
specialists occasionally poses dangers, particularly when committee
members attempt to manage the portfolio, not the process. Successful
executives bring a valuable perspective to the table provided they suspend
their natural inclination to reward success and punish failure. The
sometimes deep rooted corporate instinct to pursue winners and avoid
losers pushes portfolios toward fundamentally risky momentum-driven
strategies and away from potentially profitable contrarian opportunities.
The most effective investment committee members understand the
responsibility to oversee the investment process and to provide support for
the investment staff, while avoiding actual management of the portfolio.
Investment Staff
Strong investment staffs drive the portfolio management process. Whether
dealing with broad issues of asset allocation and spending policy or specific
issues of portfolio management and manager selection, the staff needs to
make a rigorous, compelling case for adopting a particular course of action.
Advocacy must not compromise disclosure, as actual and potential
weaknesses need to be fully described and discussed. Intellectual
dishonesty ultimately proves fatal to the investment process.
Without a disciplined process for articulating investment
recommendations, decision making tends to become informal, even casual.
In the case of asset allocation decisions, effective staff analysis establishes
and articulates a coherent, intellectual framework from which well-
grounded recommendations flow. In the case of individual manager
decisions, a rigorous evaluation of all aspects of the investment opportunity,
including thorough due diligence on the quality of the investment
principals, serves as an essential precondition to committing investment
funds.
Written recommendations provide a particularly useful means of
communicating investment ideas. The process of drafting memos often
exposes logical flaws or gaps in knowledge. Awareness that a critical


=== PAGE 352 ===
audience of colleagues and committee members will review investment
memos stimulates careful, logical exposition of proposals. Comprehensive
written treatments of investment issues provide a common background for
staff and committee members, supporting high quality discussion at
meetings.
Better decisions come from small internal decision-making groups
consisting of no more than three or four people. As the number of people
involved in a decision increases, the likelihood of a conventional,
compromising consensus increases. Obviously, with a large staff, the same
small group of people need not make all decisions. For example, different
groups might make recommendations for different asset classes, preserving
the principle of small group decision making while allowing organizations
to engage the staff resources necessary to deal with growing portfolio
complexity and increasing asset levels.
Investment organizations benefit from the constant renewal provided by
the addition of young professionals. Their energy, enthusiasm, and fresh
perspective prevent dry rot from taking hold. The apprenticeship training
process benefits both the trained and the trainer, as the process of teaching
benefits both the student and the teacher. As Yale economist James Tobin
observed, “I never fail to learn, from the students themselves and from the
discipline of presenting ideas clearly to them.” In a well-structured
organization, new hires make an early impact. Pushing responsibility down
in an organization improves performance and enhances satisfaction.
Organizational Characteristics
Strong investment management groups share a number of characteristics,
with great people constituting the single most important element. In
October 1987, Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson, then a senior executive at
Goldman Sachs, speaking at Yale’s School of Management, articulated a
compelling case that high quality individuals gravitate toward entities that
operate on the cutting edge, that embrace a global strategy, that provide
opportunities to benefit from focused mentorship, and that encourage early
acceptance of significant responsibility.
Organizations on the cutting edge choose from a broader opportunity
set. By examining nontraditional asset allocations, investors improve the


=== PAGE 353 ===
chances of finding a portfolio mix well-suited to the institution’s needs. By
considering alternatives outside of the mainstream, investors increase the
likelihood of discovering the next big winner well before it becomes the
next big bust. By evaluating managers without the requisite check-the-box
institutional characteristics, investors boost the odds of uncovering a highly
motivated, attractive group of partners. Operating on the periphery of
standard institutional norms increases opportunity for success.
A global perspective facilitates understanding of investment
alternatives, providing valuable context for consideration of even the most
parochial domestic opportunity. Aside from improving an investor’s
decision-making framework, global reach increases the scope of investment
choices, enhancing the possibility of identifying superior options.
Obviously, along with the expanded range of possibilities comes the
increased potential for failure. Overseas commitments entail inherently
higher levels of risk as availability of information and depth of
understanding almost invariably compare unfavorably to knowledge of
domestic market alternatives.
Focused mentorship provides essential training for new staff as
individuals assimilate investment management principles primarily through
experience. While academic training provides a necessary foundation,
aspiring investors learn best through serving an apprenticeship, benefiting
from day-to-day exposure to the thoughts and actions of experienced
colleagues.
Giving junior members of the team early responsibility challenges all
members of an investment organization to spread critical skills throughout
the group. Transmitting key principles to younger colleagues magnifies the
impact of more senior players, broadening the scope of an organization’s
reach and the range of its accomplishments. As a corollary benefit, the
training process reinforces and freshens the commitment of all participants
to the group’s core investment beliefs.
While both organizations and individuals benefit from Paulson’s
paradigm of a cutting edge, globally oriented institution that provides
focused mentorship and early responsibility, successful investment
organizations require an additional dimension. Most operations thrive by
taking a conventional, middle-of-the-road approach to management.


=== PAGE 354 ===
Success in investment management requires an unconventional, out-of-the-
mainstream understanding of markets.
Independent thinking contributes to strong investment decision making.
Large, bureaucratic plan sponsors provide an example of counterproductive
practices where standard investment manager search techniques exclude
nearly all interesting managers from consideration. By circulating “requests
for proposals” that require vast quantities of detailed information to
complete, the bureaucrats encourage the wrong sort of manager to apply.
The seemingly endless questionnaires—that include criteria for minimum
historical performance levels, asset size, and years of experience—ensure
conventionally unimaginative and ultimately unsuccessful management.
While the bureaucratic process practically guarantees poor results, the
bureaucrat’s job proves secure, as massive stacks of paper protect every
investment decision. Bureaucracies lack the imagination and courage to
pursue nonconventional paths that prove essential to building a successful
investment program.
Self awareness plays a critical role in investment analysis.
Understanding and exploiting strengths makes an obvious contribution to
performance. Recognizing and dealing effectively with weaknesses
represents a less obvious factor. Ruthlessly honest evaluation of absolute
and comparative advantages and disadvantages increases the likelihood of
backing winners and avoiding losers.
Frank, open discussions of failures and successes provide essential
feedback for improved decision making. By understanding failures,
investors create the opportunity to avoid making the same mistake in the
future. Analysis of winners provides keys for unlocking future successes. In
contrast, assigning blame engenders an atmosphere that discourages risk
taking, impairing the investment process in a fundamental fashion. Stated
differently, successful investment cultures encourage professionals to find
new mistakes to make, instead of simply repeating old errors.
Providing an environment with low costs of failure encourages
experimentation, allowing investors to take well-considered, intelligent
risks knowing that losses do not threaten careers. The type of
unconventional behavior necessary for meaningful investment success
produces its share of shortcomings.


=== PAGE 355 ===
Consider the record of the Yale investments team responsible for the
university’s stellar record over the past two decades. In every instance
where Yale launched a major investment initiative (e.g., absolute return,
real estate, timber, oil and gas, buyouts, venture capital, international
private equity, active domestic equity, and active foreign equity), the crack
investment team initially backed a manager that failed to stand the test of
time. Yet, in every instance, the initiatives (implemented by an improved set
of managers) contributed enormously to Yale’s investment success.
Encouraging experimentation and tolerating failure represent necessary
preconditions for developing winning strategies.
Collegiality plays a critical role in creating and sustaining an
appropriate investment environment. Supportive co-workers lessen the
lonely contrarian’s feelings of vulnerability that stem from the frequent
failures that mark even the most successful investment programs.
Understanding colleagues take some of the sting out of mistakes,
facilitating continued pursuit of risky investment opportunities.
Successful investors operate outside of the mainstream. In institutional
settings which prize conformity, pursuit of potentially rewarding investment
opportunities requires strong intellectual leadership. Without strong
leadership, investment management decisions fail to rise above normal
bureaucratic standards and produce predictably mediocre results. By
establishing a decision-making framework that encourages unconventional,
controversial actions, an effective leader provides the foundation for a
successful investment program.
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE
The nature of the not-for-profit investment governance process has changed
dramatically over time. Decades ago, trustees generally chose individual
securities at regularly scheduled quarterly meetings. Simple portfolios
contained relatively few positions, allowing full review in a period of
several hours. Finance committees populated by “titans of industry”
frequently contributed direct, useful knowledge regarding individual
security holdings.


=== PAGE 356 ===
In the 1960s and 1970s, the standard portfolio management structure
involved a handful of external managers who typically pursued balanced
mandates and placed modest demands on fiduciaries. Governance issues
remained similar to those confronting trustees managing portfolios “out of
their back pockets.” Instead of monitoring dozens of individual securities,
investment committee members tracked and evaluated a limited group of
outside managers. Because the managers invested largely in familiar
securities and home markets, the process proved comfortable for trustees
and staff alike.
In recent decades, demands placed on investment staff and trustees have
multiplied along with the increase in the number of institutional asset
classes and the corresponding explosion in the number of specialty
investment managers. Even as trustees deal with the greater complexity of
the investment world, they have encountered dramatic increases in the
breadth and seriousness of issues facing nonprofit institutions. As a
consequence, many institutions have devoted adequate time and attention to
investment management.
The structure of investment organizations often failed to keep pace with
changes in the external world. In many cases, institutions remained rooted
in the past, devoting insufficient resources to financial asset management.
Endowment management suffered in the not uncommon circumstance
where the treasurer spent only a fraction of the work week supervising
hundreds of millions of dollars. Failing to provide adequate staff support
falls in the category of penny wise and pound foolish. For every additional
one percent per annum added to investment returns, a half billion dollar
endowment generates an incremental five million dollars annually. The
costs of a high quality investment organization pale in comparison to the
value of improved results.
Attracting and compensating qualified investment professionals poses
challenges for nonprofit institutions. In the private sector, financial services
professionals earn staggering amounts of money. In contrast, as is the case
for most employees in not-for-profits, nonprofit investment professionals
earn substantially less than their for-profit counterparts. The combination of
a below market nonprofit pay scale and extraordinary private sector
compensation creates potential for divisive tension regarding compensation
issues in the nonprofit community.


=== PAGE 357 ===
Separate Management Companies
To deal with compensation issues, a number of universities established
distinct management companies to invest endowment assets. The
fundamental problem with this organizational (and in some cases, physical)
separation concerns the tendency to treat the management company solely
as an investment entity. Proper stewardship of endowment assets requires
consideration of both spending and investment policies, with particular
attention to the ways in which they interact. The job is not likely to be well
done if the management company takes responsibility for investment
decisions while others determine spending policies.
In fact, stewardship of endowment assets improves when the investment
operation becomes part of the fabric of the institution. The greater the
degree of professional interaction between endowment managers and the
rest of the educational enterprise, the more credibility investment
professionals have in discussing and recommending spending policies. At
universities, common avenues of interaction include teaching by investment
staff, seeking portfolio advice from faculty, working with development
office staff, and contributing to the analysis of noninvestment financial
issues. Aside from enhancing the overall contribution of the investment
operation to the wider organization, interacting with other parts of the
institution increases professional fulfillment for investment staff.
Ironically, establishing separate investment management companies to
facilitate increased compensation for professionals sometimes exacerbates
the problem. Greater separation leads to less identification with the
institution, reducing the psychic income garnered from supporting the not-
for-profit’s eleemosynary mission. Psychic income foregone must be
replaced with hard cash, further straining the bond between the
management company and the rest of the institution.
Stanford Management Company
The 2006 travails of Stanford Management Company illustrate in high
relief the issues surrounding compensation of investment professionals in
an academic institution. In the 1990s, Stanford established its endowment
management operation as an organization both physically and


=== PAGE 358 ===
psychologically separate from the campus. The investment team occupied
some of the most expensive real estate in the world on Sand Hill Road
adjacent to the offices of Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers. For most of the
1990s, Laurie Hoagland ably led the Stanford investment operation which
produced consistently superior results. Mike McCaffrey, former chief
executive of investment bank Robertson Stephens, took over the
management of Stanford’s portfolio in September 2000, building on
Hoagland’s base and running the portfolio effectively in the difficult period
following the collapse of the Internet bubble in March 2000.
Yet, McCaffrey found it difficult to deal with the compensation
constraints of the not-for-profit world. He found that his employees faced a
constant barrage of offers from the private sector. Frustrated by staff
turnover, he sought a means to increase his staff’s compensation in order to
improve retention. He hit upon the idea of using Stanford Management
Company to manage external assets which would provide a revenue stream
he could use to enhance his colleagues’ pay.
McCaffrey structured a proposal for the Stanford board. The plan made
substantial progress, gathering initial support from the trustees and
indications of interest from both individual and institutional investors. At
the eleventh hour, however, McCaffrey decided not to move forward based
on an insufficient level of enthusiasm from Stanford.
Paul Allen, co-founder of Microsoft, was one of the interested parties
who hoped to invest a portion of his considerable wealth with the Stanford
team. Undeterred by Stanford’s lack of enthusiasm, McCaffrey and Allen
formed a new venture, Makena Capital, to pursue the asset management
business as an independent entity. Two senior Stanford Management
professionals joined McCaffrey at Makena, gutting the leadership ranks of
the university’s investment organization. Makena raised $7 billion in short
order, including $1.5 billion from Paul Allen, a stunning accomplishment
for a start-up organization.
Among the troubling issues raised by the departure of Stanford’s senior
investment team, the most important issue concerns organizational culture.
By operating less like a not-for-profit and more like an investment bank
where pay matters above all else, Stanford Management failed to select
employees who identified with Stanford’s institutional mission. Instead of
finding individuals who wished to earn handsome compensation and


=== PAGE 359 ===
support one of the world’s great educational institutions, Stanford attracted
investment professionals who were in it for the money. Inevitably, the not-
for-profit pay discount led to high turnover among those who wanted Wall
Street compensation.
A stable, cohesive team brings enormous strengths to the investment
process. Aside from the obvious benefits of continuity to portfolio
management, investment professionals who identify with the organization’s
mission and who become part of the fabric of the place ultimately serve
institutional needs in a superior fashion. Stanford Management Company’s
failure to create a culture consistent with the university’s mission ultimately
imposed significant costs on one of the world’s great educational
institutions.
Institutions need not establish separate investment companies to address
compensation issues. Exceptions to standard policies can be made to pay
reasonably competitive salaries, including the use of incentive-based
compensation, without the radical break implied by creation of a separate
legal entity. Dealing with the trade-offs within the context of the university,
while difficult, lessens the magnitude of the problems associated with
complete separation of the investment management organization.
While the desire to create separate compensation schemes for university
investment professionals appears to drive the establishment of separate
management companies, hopes for improved governance may also
contribute to the decision. As the breadth and complexity of investment
alternatives increase, so do the demands on trustees responsible for
overseeing investment operations. Establishing an independent management
company allows the institution to look beyond the existing group of trustees
when selecting fiduciaries to oversee endowment assets.
Yet governance issues can be addressed without creating a separate
management company. Since its establishment in 1975, Yale’s Investment
Committee included nontrustee advisors to assist in governance. The use of
outside advisors, who bring valuable insight and perspective to the process,
obviates the need to establish a separate investment company to draw from
a broader pool of governance talent. As an added bonus, service by outside
advisors on the investment committee gives an institution the opportunity to
get a close look at an interesting group of institutional supporters. In fact, at


=== PAGE 360 ===
Yale, a number of investment committee members have gone on to serve on
the university’s governing board.
Establishing appropriate governance and compensation structures for
endowment management organizations poses a difficult set of issues as
radical differences between private sector and nonprofit compensation
levels create inevitable tensions. While establishing distinct subsidiaries to
manage endowment funds addresses oversight and pay issues, the
accompanying physical and psychological separation imposes significant
costs on the broader organization. Addressing compensation and
governance concerns within the context of the entire institution provides a
solution more likely to produce results consistent with the organization’s
needs.
USE OF INTERMEDIARIES
In an effort to pursue an active management program without committing
the required time, energy, and resources, many institutions take the shortcut
of using a fund of funds or a consultant. Unfortunately, the use of external
agents (instead of an internal investment team) leads down a path to
suboptimal results, as the interests of the fund of funds manager or
investment consultant inevitably diverge from the interests of the
institutional investor.
Deep understanding of markets based on meaningful interaction
between fiduciaries and external managers provides the strongest
foundation for investment success. Employing a fund of funds manager or
engaging a consultant places a filter between those entrusted with
responsibility for the assets and those making investment decisions.
Without the confidence engendered by thorough, direct understanding of
manager actions and market opportunities, investors judge competence of
external agents primarily by the performance numbers, which constitute an
insufficient, unreliable, and sometimes perverse measure. Risks associated
with distancing fiduciaries from investment managers dictate that fund of
funds and consultancy arrangements receive skeptical scrutiny.
Fund of Funds


=== PAGE 361 ===
Fund of funds managers provide the service of making investment decisions
for fiduciaries. By pooling assets, usually from less sophisticated investors,
fund of funds managers argue that economies of scale allow professional
staff to manage monies in institutional fashion. Fund of funds firms range
from multiproduct concerns that provide one-stop shopping to entities
focused on specific niches, including nearly every asset class imaginable.
By providing manager selection and monitoring services, broad-based
funds of funds suggest that they enable smaller organizations to tap into
otherwise unavailable sophisticated investment strategies. Larger
organizations sometimes hope to benefit by employing funds of funds to
gain exposure to unfamiliar market niches.
In spite of the purported benefits from employing fund of funds
managers, substantial risks stem from imposing a filter between the
investment manager and the ultimate client. Regardless of the level of
disclosure provided by the fund of funds manager, transparency in the
investment management relationship declines dramatically. Clients unable
or unwilling to understand the underlying manager characteristics rely
solely on performance to evaluate investment strategies. When results
disappoint, clients wonder not only about the investment managers, but also
about the competence of the fund of funds advisor.
Faced with poor performance, the client loses the benefits associated
with delegating responsibility to the fund of funds manager. Understanding
the source of poor results requires investigation of the underlying
investment management organizations, a task that the fiduciary hoped to
avoid. Short of a thorough underwriting of the constituent managers, clients
have no alternative other than simply reacting to the numbers, exposing the
portfolio to the damaging prospect of selling low after having bought high.
When employing fund of funds managers, investors must search for
firms with compatible professional and ethical standards. Delegating
authority to engage investment managers carries enormous import. Even
large, reputable fund of funds managers occasionally make staggeringly
inappropriate judgments. Several years ago, a private equity vehicle
launched by a multibillion-dollar fund of funds considered engaging an
individual to manage an oil and gas program. Aside from the fact that the
individual’s resume showed little direct relevant experience, a criminal


=== PAGE 362 ===
history clouded his past. Convicted of drug dealing, the purported energy
manager had also been arrested and convicted for spousal abuse.
Most investors, when confronted with this set of facts, move on to the
next opportunity. Under the best of circumstances, investing poses
significant challenges. Hiring an inexperienced partner with a criminal past
increases the difficulties immeasurably.
What motivated the staff to propose backing a poorly qualified manager
of dubious character? While the full story likely contains a complex set of
reasons, one obvious answer stands out. Fund of funds managers justify
their existence in part by making nonstandard choices. Investing in the
usual suspects provides less value added than does identifying emerging
managers unavailable to most market participants.
Ultimately, the fund of funds decided to put the former drug dealer in
the energy investment business. Not content simply to back this individual
in the firm’s standard format as one of a number of managers in a pool, the
organization decided to devote the entire energy fund to this single
manager. Life is too short to waste time making a concentrated bet on an
individual with a checkered past, when the world provides countless
superior alternatives.
In another extraordinary incident, Paloma Partners, a multibillion-dollar
fund of funds, engaged John Mulheren’s Buffalo Partners to manage a risk
arbitrage portfolio. Mulheren gained notoriety in February 1988, when he
packed his trunk with a .233 caliber Israeli Galil assault rifle, 9-millimeter
semiautomatic pistol, .357 Magnum pistol, 12-gauge pistol-grip shotgun,
and three hundred rounds of ammunition, intending to shoot Ivan Boesky.
Alerted by Mulheren’s wife, State of New Jersey troopers arrested
Mulheren, preventing a possible tragedy.2
Since Paloma Partners refuses to disclose names of underlying
investment managers, even to clients, most of the firm’s investors were
unaware of the relationship. Upon learning of the involvement with
Mulheren, a potential client challenged the fund manager, arguing the
investment did not meet institutional standards. “Mulheren’s a great
investor when he’s taking his lithium,” replied the manager.
Adding a layer to the investment management process decreases
transparency, posing serious problems for fiduciaries. Instead of relying on


=== PAGE 363 ===
someone’s judgment in making investment decisions, the fiduciary relies on
someone’s judgment about someone’s judgment in making the ultimate
decisions. While commitments to convicted drug dealers and would-be
assassins represent extreme examples of poor judgment, the incidents
highlight the risk of using intermediaries to make decisions. The greater the
number of layers, the greater the likelihood that outcomes deviate from the
fiduciary’s preferences.
Aside from the issues of transparency and delegation of authority, fund
of funds suffer from burdensome fee structures. In the world of active
management, the majority of assets fail to produce risk-adjusted excess
returns as the certainty of manager fees and transaction costs overwhelm the
false promise of investment success. Stated simply, the fund of funds
manager adds another layer of fees to already debilitating charges, further
diminishing the chances of realizing market-beating returns.
On top of the additional fee burden, the fund of funds faces the
challenge of adverse selection, which limits the available opportunity set.
Investment managers vastly prefer direct relationships with providers of
capital. Funds of funds represent an inflexible and unreliable source of
funding, because they do not control directly the monies they employ to
make commitments. Since the highest quality investment managers enjoy
the greatest ability to pick and choose their investor base, the fund of funds
fights an uphill battle in accessing top notch investment firms.
Discrimination against funds of funds usually proceeds quietly, since
prudent managers guard against the day when they might need to tap fund
of funds’ money, however unreliable it might be. Taking a rare public stand,
in 2006, world class venture capital firm Sequoia Capital eliminated all
funds of funds from its investor ranks.3 By stating publicly what many
managers practice privately, Sequoia Capital highlighted the problem of
adverse selection.
Some evidence for the underperformance of funds of funds comes from
the 2006 NACUBO Endowment Study.4 Large endowments (with assets
greater than $1 billion) reported hedge fund returns of 11.0 percent for the
year ending June 30, 2006. Small endowments (with assets between $25
million and $50 million) posted hedge fund returns of 8.2 percent. What
accounts for the difference? Funds of funds likely contributed to the


=== PAGE 364 ===
relatively poor performance of smaller endowments. According to the
study, only 2.7 percent of large endowments used funds of funds, while 47
percent of small endowments employed funds of funds. Apparently, a
relationship exists between the use of funds of funds and substandard
returns.
Further evidence on the poor returns generated by funds of funds comes
from a study by Josh Lerner of Harvard, Antoinette Schoar of MIT, and
Wan Wong of Harvard. In Smart Institutions, Foolish Choices?: The
Limited Partner Performance Puzzle, the authors examine investment
returns for private equity funds selected by various categories of investors.
Returns on funds chosen by endowments produced “by far the best overall
performance” with an average internal rate of return (IRR) of 20 percent.
Funds of funds failed miserably, selecting partnerships with an average IRR
of negative two percent.5 The academic research backs up the a priori
intuition. Investors sensibly avoid funds of funds based on issues of
transparency, judgment, fees, and adverse selection.
Consulting Firms
Seeking to supplement internal resources, many institutions engage
consulting firms to contribute to the investment process. The notion of
employing qualified external resources strikes many fiduciaries as a
sensible means to deal with the complexities of portfolio management.
Unfortunately, the dynamics of the consulting business frequently drive
clients to suboptimal outcomes.
Consulting firms maximize profits by providing identical advice to as
many clients as possible. In the investment world, which demands
portfolios custom tailored to institution-specific risk and return preferences,
a cookie cutter approach fails. Clients must either identify a consulting firm
that cares about goals other than profit maximization or manage the
consulting relationship to achieve appropriately tailored advice.
Consultants express conventional views and make safe
recommendations. Because consultants rarely espouse unconventional
points of view, they provide more than adequate cover when dealing with
investment committees. Decision makers rest comfortably, knowing that a
recognized consulting firm blessed the chosen investment strategy.


=== PAGE 365 ===
Selecting managers from the consultant’s internally approved
recommended list serves as a poor starting point for identifying managers
likely to provide strong future results. No consultant who wishes to stay
employed recommends a start-up manager with all of the attendant
organizational and investment risks. Because consultants seek to spread the
costs of identifying and monitoring managers, consultants recommend
established managers that have the capacity (if not the ability) to manage
large pools of assets. Clients end up with bloated, fee-driven investment
management businesses instead of nimble return-oriented entrepreneurial
firms.
Unfortunately, the economics of consulting drive an unusual wedge
between the interests of the consultant and the interests of the client.
Ongoing demand for consulting services requires that clients remain
dependent on the consultant, reducing incentives for consultants to move
clients toward self-sufficiency. In extreme cases consultants recommend
programs that, while ostensibly in the client’s interests, simply serve to
assure a continued stream of income for the consultant. For example,
private equity consultants, also known as “gatekeepers,” sometimes
recommend direct co-investment programs to clients, which are obviously
ill-equipped to handle the program. (The client cannot even make a
partnership decision without assistance; how could the client make an even
more difficult direct investment decision?) Along with the co-investment
recommendation, gatekeepers offer selection and monitoring services. If
successful, the gatekeeper locks in a combination of partnership selection,
co-investment advice, and monitoring services, creating an annuity stream
lasting the life of the investment program.
In an even more troubling development, many consulting firms now
offer fund of funds investment management services. The entire concept
rests on an irreconcilable conflict of interest in which the purportedly
objective consultant recommends that the client hire the consultant to
manage assets. The combination of a self-interested consulting firm and the
structurally flawed fund of funds business leads to an ugly proposition for
the investment management client.
A former consultant summarizes the problems of the consulting
industry in the following polemic:


=== PAGE 366 ===
Ninety-five percent of institutions rely on a consultant to come in
once a year, do a manager search that costs $18,000 conducted by
someone with four years of industry experience, select a manager
who is gathering assets, has good three-year performance numbers
(how many times have you seen a consultant or committee pick a
manager with poor three-year performance?) and has standard
management fees. This scenario is repeated daily in the endowment
and foundation world. The same institutions will fire the manager,
who they barely know through their once a year client service
presentation, when they underperform for two years.
Consultants, for business reasons, cannot spend a lot of time on
managers who will keep their asset base small. The economies of
scale are not there. If there is a great manager who may have $50
million or $100 million of capacity per year, a consultant cannot
cover them in detail. It just does not scale. Therefore, consultants
are geared toward large managers with standard management fees
that have lots of capacity going forward.
Interposing consultants between fund fiduciaries and external managers
creates a range of problems that stem from a disconnect between the
consulting firm’s profit motive and the client’s investment objectives. While
consulting firms offer a shortcut that avoids the hard work of creating a
dedicated investment operation, as is the case with many shortcuts, the end
results disappoint.
DECISION-MAKING PROCESS
Reasonable decision-making processes give appropriate emphasis to the
range of issues facing committee and staff. Charley Ellis describes a useful
framework for categorizing various portfolio management decisions. Policy
decisions concern long-term issues that inform the basic structural
framework of the investment process. Strategic decisions represent
intermediate-term moves designed to adapt longer term policies to
immediate market opportunities and institutional realities. Trading and


=== PAGE 367 ===
tactical decisions involve short-term implementation of strategies and
policies.
In his wonderful book, Winning the Loser’s Game, Ellis bemoans the
fact that decision makers spend too much time on relatively exciting trading
and tactical decisions at the expense of the more powerful, yet more
mundane, policy decisions.6 A decision-making process centered on making
high quality policy decisions increases an investor’s chances of winning.
Policy Target Focus
Policy asset allocation targets represent the heart of the investment process.
No other aspect of portfolio management plays as great a role in
determining a fund’s ultimate performance. No other statement says as
much about the character of a fund. Establishing a governance framework
focused on policy decisions constitutes the most fundamental obligation of
investment fiduciaries. Without a disciplined, rigorous process for setting
asset allocation targets, effective portfolio management becomes
impossible.
A robust discussion of asset allocation targets requires careful
preparation. At the meeting prior to the annual review, staff members
present to the committee a brief description of the issues they intend to
analyze. The chair of the committee should encourage members to offer
suggestions for issues that the investment staff could then consider along
with the internally generated topics. A well-structured process underpins
careful decision making.
Asset allocation targets ought to be reviewed once (and only once) per
year. By concentrating the discussion of investment policy in one meeting,
the most important investment decisions receive concentrated attention
from both staff and committee. Perhaps equally important, limiting policy
discussions to the assigned meeting diminishes the possibility of damage
from ill-considered moves made in emotional response to the waves of
gloom or euphoria that sweep over markets from time to time.
Yale and the 1987 Market Crash


=== PAGE 368 ===
The October 1987 crash in stock prices placed stresses and strains on
decision-making processes. Yale felt the pressure. In spite of the fact that
the university had followed a quarterly meeting schedule since the
investment committee was established in 1975, two extraordinary meetings
were held in late 1987 and early 1988 in response to the crash. Even though
at the time of the meetings stock prices were substantially lower and bond
prices measurably higher than at the time of the June 1987 policy review,
the committee discussed whether to increase the policy allocation to bonds
at the expense of stocks.
Yale made a disciplined late October, post-crash rebalancing purchase
of tens of millions of dollars of equities funded by a corresponding sale of
tens of millions of dollars of bonds. In the context of the gloom of late
1987, Yale’s action appeared rash. Other institutions not only allowed
equity positions to drift downward by the amount of the relative stock
market decline, they further reduced equity exposure through net sales in
November and December. Such sales seemed prudent in an environment
where the New York Times published a weekly chart that superimposed
1987 stock prices on a chart of prices for 1929 through 1932.
Yale’s internal committee dynamics proved difficult. In a written
memorandum, one member characterized Yale’s asset allocation as “super
aggressive” and on the “far edge of aggressiveness.” Citing bleak short-
term prospects for equities, he commented that if Yale were right to have an
aggressive equity posture, the university will get “little credit,” but if Yale
were wrong there would be “all hell to pay.” Believing that “events of the
past six months have diminished long-term prospects for equity markets,”
the committee member concluded that the university’s assumptions
regarding expected returns were overly optimistic. Hence, he suggested that
both short-term and long-term considerations required downward
adjustment of Yale’s equity target. Another, more analytically inclined
member, wondered if increases in historical volatility made stocks less
attractive on a relative basis.7 By questioning assumptions that had been
examined as part of the annual policy review only four months earlier,
committee members exposed Yale to the risk of an untimely reversal of
strategy.


=== PAGE 369 ===
After much Sturm und Drang, Yale maintained policy targets, reaping
attractive returns on its post-crash rebalancing trade. In spite of the
university’s success, behind-the-scenes discussions illustrate the potential
danger of revisiting policy target levels too frequently, particularly in the
midst of a market crisis. While trauma surrounding the 1987 stock market
crash caused the university to violate past practice of limiting policy
allocation discussions to one meeting per year, disciplined implementation
of a sensible policy ultimately contributed to the pursuit of effective
strategies in a difficult environment.
Although in retrospect the committee’s actions appear innocuous, in
other states of the world the positions taken by the investment committee
members could have had severe repercussions for Yale’s investment staff.
In particular, the extraordinary memo containing a committee member’s ex
post facto criticism of the policy allocation targets had dangerous overtones.
Had the market not recovered within a relatively short time frame, those
staff members closely identified with the rebalancing trade might have
suffered serious damage to their careers.
Strategic and Tactical Issues
While the committee meeting on policy asset allocation represents the focal
point of the investment process, other meetings deal with important
strategic issues. Following the close of the fiscal year, a meeting devoted to
portfolio evaluation discusses the character and performance of the overall
endowment and individual asset classes. Portfolio review memoranda
describe individual asset classes in depth, placing results in the context of
market conditions and identifying factors that influence significant
investment opportunities. The positioning of an asset class relative to its
benchmark with respect to fundamental characteristics—such as size,
sector, and style—highlights significant portfolio bets that are evaluated
retrospectively and prospectively. Active management efforts receive
grades in the form of detailed report cards for each manager. The individual
manager assessments include not only performance data, but information on
reporting, transparency, fee structures, and co-investment. Analysis of
strengths and weaknesses of portfolio strategies leads to an outline for
future projects to improve portfolio management. In essence, the portfolio


=== PAGE 370 ===
evaluation meeting provides a backward-looking assessment and a forward-
looking strategic plan.
The remaining two quarterly meetings generally have a topical focus,
frequently involving in-depth analysis of a specific asset class. Meetings
centered on individual asset classes drill deep to provide a granular view,
allowing committee and staff to evaluate thoroughly every aspect of asset
class management. Decision-making assessments consider the impact of
bets regarding size, sector, and style. One particularly effective exercise
goes well beyond traditional performance evaluation by examining returns
of terminated managers. In assessing performance of fired managers
relative to benchmarks and actual portfolio results, investigators gain
insight into the effectiveness of termination moves, a topic often
comfortably ignored after completing the difficult task of severing ties.
Asset class reviews provide a chance for external investment managers
to engage investment committee and staff in discussion of significant
market issues. While sensible investors avoid the all-too-prevalent “beauty
contest” (in which a series of managers make difficult-to-distinguish-
between oral presentations in a hiring pageant), investment committee
members do benefit from face-to-face interaction with managers. Creating a
forum for lively interaction between managers and committee members
adds value to the investment process. But, rather than allowing managers to
present “canned” portfolio appraisals, investment staff should structure
panel discussion to stimulate candid discussion of manager-specific
approaches to asset class pitfalls and opportunities.
Occasionally, committee meetings deal with market issues that cut
across individual asset classes. For example, the savings and loan debacle
of the late 1980s informally influenced the private equity, real estate, and
absolute return asset classes. In the late 1990s the Internet mania affected
investments in the marketable equity, private equity, and absolute return
asset classes. Focusing attention on the broad implications of a particular
market phenomenon enhances the ability of an investment organization to
pursue attractive strategies and to identify hidden risks.
Effective investors maintain focus on long-term policy targets, making
the annual asset allocation review the centerpiece of an investment fund’s
agenda. Devoting the meeting after the close of the fiscal year to a thorough
review of portfolio characteristics and performance provides a report card


=== PAGE 371 ===
for the past and a road map for the future. The two interim meetings allow
in-depth examination of a particular asset class or an interesting investment
opportunity. Hewing to a well-defined schedule of meetings provides a
structure for effective decision making and reduces the opportunity for
committee and staff to make undisciplined moves.
DECISION-MAKING CHALLENGES
Effective endowment management processes encourage long-term
investing. The universality with which investors proclaim themselves long-
term in orientation matches only the startling degree to which short-term
thinking drives investor decisions. Perhaps human nature dictates that short-
term issues overwhelm long-term considerations. Time horizons shrink with
the trauma of unexpected loss, the desire for immediate gratification, and
the competitive need to win.
The human desire to make a visible contribution shortens time horizons.
Because investment staff and trustees wish to leave their marks on the
portfolio, potential problems exist if the investment fund’s horizon exceeds
a staff member’s expected tenure or trustee’s term. When managing
perpetual life assets, explicit recognition of the discontinuity between
personal and institutional time frames facilitates effective decision making.
Continuity in management and governance provide another practical
response.
Investors seeking short-term success will likely be frustrated by markets
too efficient to offer much in terms of easy gains. Even if managers find
short-term opportunities to exploit, they put themselves on a treadmill. As
investors successfully exploit one short-term inefficiency, it must be
replaced by another position followed by another and yet another ad
infinitum. Creating wealth through a series of short-term investments is
difficult, risky work. Moreover, managers hoping to beat the market every
quarter dramatically limit their investment universe, pursuing only those
mispricings likely to resolve themselves in the near term. Short-term
players create opportunities for those few who attempt to invest based on
considered long-term estimates.


=== PAGE 372 ===
True long-term investing dramatically broadens the investment
opportunity set, allowing investors to profit from the irrationality of short-
term players. Yet, because long-term investing involves an intrinsically
higher risk profile, successful organizations must develop mechanisms to
cope with the associated risks.
Short-Term Thinking
Too many market players operate with short time horizons. Anecdotal
evidence abounds that many investment managers favor investment ideas
that promise to pay off in three or six months. At the same time, fear of
failure causes portfolio managers to hug the benchmark to avoid potentially
disastrous falls to the bottom of the rankings. Mediocre performance
inevitably results, as managers incur high transactions costs pursuing
second-rate ideas within the context of an index-like portfolio.
Similar problems exist in the world of endowment management. Annual
investment performance comparisons create (or reflect?) a horse race
mentality. An audience of trustees, alumni, and faculty wait with great
anticipation for the year-end results, comparing performance numbers to
those from the peer group with which the institution competes. Short of
beating an archrival at football, posting the highest one-year investment
result ranks near the top of the list of institutional aspirations. As if the one-
year numbers were not sufficiently short term, the consulting firm
Cambridge Associates now publishes quarterly results for endowment
portfolios. Obviously, judging long-term pools of assets by trailing three-
month performance numbers induces the wrong kind of thinking,
emphasizing short-term considerations over all else.
Performance competition causes some institutions to engage in bizarre
behavior, including inflating published endowment values and reporting
returns gross of fees. While secrecy surrounding overreporting of
endowment levels prevents accurate measurement, a distressingly large
number of institutions follow the practice of reporting gross returns. In the
most recent endowment return survey conducted by Cambridge Associates
8 percent of those participating reported results before fees.8 Of what
possible use are such numbers? From a budgetary perspective, net returns
provide useful data since institutions consume investment income after fees.


=== PAGE 373 ===
From an investment perspective, net returns allow measurement of true
value added relative to benchmarks. Barring a reasonable explanation, it
appears that institutions report gross returns simply to gain a dubious
advantage in the annual investment derby.
Consensus-Driven Behavior
Endowment managers engage in behavior similar to mutual fund
benchmark hugging with peer group investment policies providing the stake
to which an institution’s asset allocation is tethered. Varying too far from
the group consensus exposes the manager to the risk of being labeled
unconventional. If the institution fails in its unusual approach, the policy
will likely be abandoned and the investment staff will likely be
unemployed. In contrast, had the institution failed with a standard
institutional portfolio, policies may still be abandoned, but investment
professionals would likely remain gainfully, if not happily, employed.
Concern regarding peer behavior rests, in part, on a rational basis.
Educational institutions operate in a competitive environment, vying with
one another for faculty, students, administrators, and financial support.
Endowment size helps define an institution’s competitive position, directly
through provision of financial support and indirectly through creation of
reputational capital. If dramatically different investment policies cause one
university’s endowment to decline precipitously, that institution may join a
new, less prestigious peer group, losing not only financial assets, but also
the confidence of important institutional constituencies. Conversely,
unusual investment success enhances an institution’s financial and
reputational position. Trustees, generally a risk averse lot, may prefer
prospective failure with a conventional portfolio to uncertain success with
an unconventional approach.
However rational concern regarding peer behavior might be, if market
participants weight heavily the consensus portfolio in asset allocation
deliberations, change becomes quite difficult. In the extreme, fear of being
different has everyone looking over their shoulder at everyone else’s
portfolio and no one looking at fundamental portfolio structure. Sensible
portfolio management processes encourage the use of first principles to


=== PAGE 374 ===
create portfolios appropriate for the institution, not mindless replication of
other institutional asset mixes.
Contrarian Opportunity and Risk
The attitude of portfolio managers contributes to the success or failure of an
investment program. Significant differences between successful investment
operations and other well-run business activities cause standard corporate
management techniques to fail in the investment world. Most businesses
grow by feeding winners. Putting resources behind successful products
generally leads to larger, increasingly impressive gains. Ruthless cuts of
failed initiatives preserve corporate resources for more attractive strategies.
In contrast, investment success generally stems from contrarian
impulses. View winners suspiciously; consider reducing or even eliminating
previously successful strategies. Eye losers hopefully; consider adding to
the out-of-favor approach.
Contrarian investing represents more than a reflex action causing
investors to mindlessly “buy the dips.” Out-of-favor positions must be
supported by careful analysis of the fundamental drivers of value.
Investigation of the contrarian alternative both provides a rationale for
establishing the position and creates the conviction necessary to maintain
the position in the face of market skepticism. Do not expect immediate
gratification. In fact, going against the grain will likely appear foolish in the
short run as already cheap assets become cheaper, leaving the true
contrarian fundamentally out of sync with investors more in tune with the
market.
Establishing and maintaining positions out of the mainstream requires
decision making by relatively small groups. As groups increase in size,
consensus thinking increasingly dominates the process. Behavioral studies
identify a tendency for “group think.” Most people so desire conformity
that they embrace obviously wrong positions to avoid being at odds with
the crowd.
Contrarian, long-term investing poses extraordinary challenges under
the best of circumstances. In an institutional environment with staff and
committees and boards, nearly insurmountable obstacles exist. Creating a


=== PAGE 375 ===
decision-making framework that encourages unconventional thinking
constitutes a critical goal for fund fiduciaries.
Unfortunately, overcoming the tendency to follow the crowd, while
necessary, proves insufficient to guarantee investment success. By pursuing
ill-considered, idiosyncratic policies, market players expose portfolios to
unnecessary, often unrewarded risks. While courage to take a different path
enhances chances for success, investors face likely failure unless a
thoughtful set of investment principles undergirds the courage.
New York University and Bonds
Even the most well-meaning fiduciaries, motivated by altruistic intentions,
sometimes pursue out of the mainstream policies which cause substantial
economic and reputational damage. The story of NYU’s endowment
management over the past two decades vividly illustrates the dangers of
implementing poorly founded investment strategies.
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, motivated by concerns regarding the
fragility of the university’s finances and the riskiness of the stock market,
NYU allocated an average of 66 percent to bonds, 30 percent to stocks, and
4 percent to other assets.9 NYU differed materially from her sister
institutions by holding roughly double the average proportion of bonds and
roughly half the average proportion of stocks.
Between 1981 and 1982, at the bottom of the equity market, NYU
dropped its already low equity allocation from 33 percent to 7 percent of the
portfolio, increasing the already high bond commitment from 62 percent to
90 percent of assets. Bonds continued to maintain a share in excess of 90
percent of assets through 1985, according to public reports on asset
allocation, while stocks languished at single-digit levels, falling as low as 3
percent of the endowment. Even though after 1985 annual reports ceased to
provide information on portfolio allocations, it appears that NYU persisted
with its unusual portfolio structure throughout the late 1980s and early
1990s. After a nine-year disclosure hiatus, in 1995 the university reported
holding 86 percent of assets in bonds and 9 percent of assets in stocks,
indicating a continuing commitment to bonds. Only in 1997 did NYU begin
to make a modest move away from fixed income to higher expected return
assets.


=== PAGE 376 ===
Unfortunately, the bond-dominated portfolio left NYU on the sidelines
during one of the greatest bull markets in history. From 1978 to 1998, stock
returns exceeded bond returns in sixteen of twenty years, with stocks
enjoying a 6 percent per annum advantage over bonds. Only in the
aftermath of the 1987 crash did the fixed income strategy appear sensible,
causing NYU board chairman Larry Tisch to receive a standing ovation at a
NYU investment committee meeting. Market activity supported only a brief
huzzah as the S&P 500 ended the 1987 calendar year 5.2 percent above the
level recorded at the beginning of the year. Even when viewed from the
perspective of a time frame as short as the twelve calendar months that
included one of the all-time great stock market debacles, NYU’s strategy
failed to make sense.
As the bull market continued apace, Tisch turned away questions
regarding the lack of equity exposure by responding that “the train has left
the station.”10 Meanwhile, the opportunity costs for the NYU endowment
mounted. From 1982 to 1998, an endowment wealth index for colleges and
universities increased nearly eightfold, while NYU’s endowment grew 4.6
times.11 Had the institution’s results simply mirrored college and university
medians, in 1998 NYU’s endowment would have been nearly a billion
dollars larger than the actual level of $1.3 billion.
Beginning in the late 1990s, NYU began to reduce its overallocation to
domestic fixed income, moving assets to domestic and foreign equities and
absolute return strategies. Yet the legacy of the misguided bond bet endures,
as NYU’s 2005 portfolio shows scant exposure to the important asset
classes of private equity and real assets. By failing to understand the
relationship between the permanent nature of endowment funds and equity
investments, NYU’s endowment sustained long lasting, if not permanent
damage.
Boston University and Seragen
Boston University’s investment in Seragen, championed by the institution’s
former president, John Silber, posed a fundamentally different threat to the
health of the university’s finances. By funneling as much as $90 million of
operating and endowment funds into a single biotechnology-based start-up


=== PAGE 377 ===
company, Boston University made an unreasonably large bet on an
extremely high risk investment.12
Silber first became interested in Seragen’s “fusion toxins” at a 1986
lecture by Boston University scientist and Seragen founder Dr. John R.
Murphy. In 1987, the university plowed $25 million of its $175 million
endowment into the venture, buying a controlling interest from a
Norwegian pharmaceutical company. Over the years, through further equity
investments, operating support, and asset purchases, Boston University’s
exposure to Seragen went from excessive to irresponsible. In exchange for
massive injections of funds, the university obtained control of the board,
with Silber among the designated directors.
The institution’s unusually concentrated, controlling position in Seragen
attracted the attention of the Massachusetts attorney general who caused the
university to dilute its ownership stake by pursuing public offerings. Even
though share issuance raised more than $50 million in 1992 and 1993,
Seragen’s burn rate managed to outpace the cash inflows. By 1996,
cumulative losses amounted to $200 million, causing Dr. Murphy to
disassociate himself from Seragen, citing “business problems.”
In spite of successes on the scientific front, Seragen’s finances faltered,
leading to delisting from the Nasdaq in September 1997. The stock, which
went public in April 1992 at $12 a share and reached a high of $15 in
January 1993, traded at 5/8 upon delisting. At the time, Boston University’s
stake amounted to little more than $5 million.
Desperate to salvage value, in December 1997, Boston University
infused a further $5 million into Seragen by purchasing money-losing assets
and providing ongoing support from the university’s operating budget. By
buying time, the institution managed to arrange an exit from the financially
troubled company through a sale to Ligand Pharmaceuticals in August
1998. On September 20, 1998, the New York Times reported that the value
of Boston University’s position ultimately amounted to approximately $8.4
million, representing a loss of more than 90 percent on cost. Had the
university’s Seragen stake been invested in a diversified portfolio of stocks,
the endowment would have benefited by avoiding the disastrous Seragen
loss as well as by appreciation of tens of millions of dollars on the equity
positions.


=== PAGE 378 ===
Ironically, Silber’s positive assessment of Seragen’s science appears
well-founded. The firm’s major drug, Interleukin-2, received FDA approval
in February 1999. Yet the university stands to accrue little benefit from the
drug’s commercial success as Boston University’s economic interest in the
project diminished greatly with the Ligand takeover. Seragen’s progress
came too late and cost too much to reward the firm’s shareholders.
By “rolling the dice” with endowment investments Boston University
violated fundamental investment principles, providing a disservice to the
institutions’ constituents. Haunted by its failure to invest in Alexander
Graham Bell’s invention of the telephone, the university vowed not to
repeat the mistake with Seragen. Unfortunately, spectacular investment
success stories become clear only after the fact, forcing sensible investors to
avoid outsized bets. A high risk, concentrated investment in Seragen, in the
words of one faculty member, allowed Silber a shot at leaving “as a legacy
a gigantic endowment.”13 Fiduciary requirements, no matter how liberally
interpreted, fail to accommodate actions inconsistent with constructing a
reasonably diversified portfolio.
 
In pursuing investment policies motivated by a desire to create an impact,
NYU and Boston University inflicted serious damage on their portfolios of
permanent assets. By playing a futile market valuation game, NYU missed
the benefits of one of the greatest bull markets ever. In an ill-considered
attempt to swing for the fences, Boston University suffered a dramatic
direct loss and incurred even greater opportunity costs. Responsible
fiduciaries best serve institutions by following basic investment principles,
avoiding the temptation to pursue policies designed to satisfy specific
individual agendas.
PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT
Effective management of relationships between fiduciaries and investment
advisors adds substantial incremental value to the portfolio. Strong
relationships based on mutual trust and understanding allow money
managers and clients to behave in an informed contrarian manner. In the


=== PAGE 379 ===
absence of well-grounded relationships, money managers place their
business at risk and clients run the risk of making ill-timed cash flow
decisions, damaging the portfolio by buying high and selling low.
Successful portfolio management depends on client comprehension of
the investment advisor’s decision-making process. Without intimate
knowledge of a firm’s investment principles, clients simply react to
performance, a no win proposition. If fiduciaries chase performance,
funding a manager on a hot streak, disappointment results when the wind at
the manager’s back inevitably dissipates. When contrarian instincts cause
fiduciaries to back a poorly performing manager, mediocre returns follow if
poor performance persists because the manager lacks skill. Distinguishing
between good fortune and good judgment demands thorough understanding
of the manager’s approach to investing.
Informed relationship management requires ongoing performance
evaluation, incorporating both qualitative and quantitative factors.
Monitoring the quality and commitment of a firm’s principals plays a
central role in assessing the ability of an organization to achieve excellence.
Other significant issues include fidelity to investment principles and
maintenance of an appropriate organizational structure. Regular face-to-face
meetings between fund managers and external advisors constitute the most
important tool for performance evaluation.
Portfolio return data provide essential hard input into the performance
assessment process. By comparing manager returns to passive market
benchmarks and active manager benchmarks, investors measure the
successes and failures of an investment program. Sensible investors look
beyond the basic return data to understand the risks associated with the
portfolios that generated the returns.
Quantitative measures dominate performance evaluation exercises,
reducing the complex web of portfolio construction decisions to a precise
presentation of return data. The stark clarity of a set of historical
performance numbers causes many investors to emphasize hard quantitative
tools at the expense of fundamentally important soft factors. Striking an
appropriate balance between quantitative and qualitative factors poses a
challenge for fund fiduciaries.
Sensible investors impose thoughtful limitations on a portfolio. By
limiting commitments to transparent, well-understood strategies, the


=== PAGE 380 ===
universe of appropriate managers for a fund coincides with the scope of that
institution’s expertise. While investors need not acquire the depth of
knowledge necessary to replicate an external advisor’s investment
management process, careful clients obtain a complete understanding of
portfolio strategies. Without a firm grasp of the process, the client’s role
degrades to passive monitoring of performance, with the dangers inherent in
placing investment results foremost in manager evaluation.
Assessing the viability of manager relationships requires continuous
monitoring of a combination of qualitative and quantitative factors. Strong
investment performance alone fails to justify maintaining a manager
relationship. If the sense of partnership diminishes because of changes in
people, philosophy, or structure, then tough-minded fiduciaries move on.
Similarly, weak performance fails to justify terminating an investment
management contract. If strong people in an appropriately structured firm
pursue an intelligent approach to markets, elements critical to investment
success remain in place. While understanding the causes of poor
performance provides important insights for investment oversight, bad
results in and of themselves present no fundamental threat to an otherwise
sound investment relationship.
Qualitative Factors
Just as qualitative considerations dominate hiring decisions, those same
qualitative factors dominate performance evaluations. If investment success
simply required retaining managers with strong performance and firing
managers with weak performance, life would be simple. Because the
numbers provide only part of the story, difficult-to-evaluate qualitative
factors play a central role.
Just as the quality of people drives manager hiring decisions,
monitoring the people involved in the investment process drives
relationship management. Short-run issues concern the enthusiasm,
motivation, and work ethic of investment advisors. Responsible fiduciaries
monitor the degree of an advisor’s engagement, looking for warning signs
of diminished interest or commitment. In the long run, generational
transition issues loom large.
