

=== PAGE 261 ===
material made from stacked sheets of narrow wood strips, has led to a
decrease in demand for plywood and the large diameter logs required to
make plywood.
International dynamics affect timber supply and demand, as imports and
exports of wood products play a significant role in determining timber
prices. While approximately 11 percent of the U.S. harvest is exported,
imports, primarily from Canada, account for nearly 25 percent of U.S.
forest products consumption. U.S. dollar–Canadian dollar currency
fluctuations strongly influence U.S. forest product and timber prices.
Active Management
Investments in timberland follow two principles that underlie attractive real
assets investments. First, discounted pricing contributes to high risk-
adjusted returns. In the case of timber, investors seek substantial discounts
to the metric of standing timber value. Second, opportunities to create value
independent of market or commodity price fluctuations add to the
attractiveness of timber investments.
Active management plays a somewhat less critical role in real estate,
energy, and timber investments than it does in illiquid investments in
leveraged buyouts and venture capital. Because the assets themselves drive
a substantial portion of real estate, energy, and timber returns, investors
receive the asset-based returns even in the absence of stellar active
management. In contrast, without superb active management, investments
in venture capital make no sense at all.
Timber Prices and Inflation
Timberland shines during periods of high inflation and market turmoil. In
the inflationary years of 1973 and 1974, for example, the S&P 500 returned
an annualized -20.8 percent. After adjusting for inflation of 10.5 percent per
year, the S&P generated an annualized return of an even more dismal -28.3
percent. Over those same two years, however, timberland returned a
nominal 36.6 percent per year, equating to an annualized real return of 23.7
percent. That said, because links to inflation require that markets operate in
reasonable equilibrium, secular trends that influence end-product demand


=== PAGE 262 ===
might overwhelm short-term inflation sensitivity, disappointing the inflation
hedging aspirations of timberland investors.
Alignment of Interests
Timber investment management organizations (TIMOs) provide a vehicle
through which investors might participate in timberland investments. In the
1990s, when institutional investors began to show interest in timber, the
existing TIMOs exhibited a variety of problems. Many were owned by large
banks or insurance companies, creating the potential for conflicts between
the interests of the financial conglomerate and the interests of the
institutional timberland investor. Further limiting the set of attractive
alternatives, a number of TIMOs employed unappealing allocation models,
either allocating investments to specific investors on a first-come, first-
served basis or on a subjective assessment of client needs and preferences.
Few TIMOs sported sensible structures.
Today, a number of TIMOs meet reasonable institutional standards, with
independent organizations offering well-structured commingled funds that
contain fair deal terms. Even so, investors must continue to look out for and
avoid the structural deficits that plagued the timber management industry in
the 1990s.
Market Characteristics
According to Cambridge Associates, as of December 31, 2006, thirty
TIMOs managed a total of $5.9 billion in commingled funds. Separate
institutional accounts managed by those same TIMOs amount to an
additional $14.0 billion. Timber REITs provide a further $11.9 billion of
investment opportunity.
Summary
Timber offers institutional portfolios an opportunity to realize high risk-
adjusted returns and a degree of protection against unanticipated inflation.
Along with real estate and energy investments, timber provides a hedge


=== PAGE 263 ===
against inflation without the significant opportunity costs of investment in
TIPS.
Sustainable harvests of timberland produce substantial cash flows,
similar to the high income levels characteristic of other real assets
investments. The inefficiencies in the illiquid markets for timber create
opportunities for high quality managers to add substantial value. Timber
represents a valuable addition to the set of institutional investment
alternatives.
PRIVATE EQUITY
Properly selected investments in leveraged buyouts and venture capital
generate high returns relative to other equity alternatives, enhancing overall
portfolio results. Superior private equity returns come at the price of higher
risk levels, as investors expose assets to greater financial leverage (in the
case of buyouts) and more substantial operating uncertainty (in the case of
venture capital). Because of the strong fundamental links between private
equity investments and marketable equities, private equity provides limited
diversification to investors.
Private equity investments overcome the problems associated with
divergence of interests between shareholders and management evident in
many of today’s publicly traded companies. Separation of ownership (by
shareholders) and control (by management) results in a substantial gap
between the interests of shareholders and the actions of management, since
without significant equity interests managers often pursue a wide range of
activities designed to improve their lot at the expense of outside owners.
Over-the-top offices, excessive salaries, bloated fleets of airplanes, and
other unjustified managerial perquisites rarely enter the picture in profit-
oriented private investments. Private company managements operate with
longer time horizons and lower risk aversion, aggressively pursuing
strategies that promote creation of enterprise value. Because private deals
generally require management to take material ownership stakes, interests
of outside owners and operating management align.
In the venture capital world, entrepreneurial start-ups engage
individuals who exhibit a single-minded focus on building successful


=== PAGE 264 ===
companies. In the realm of buyouts, companies attract management devoted
to improving the operation’s bottom line, addressing the challenges of a
highly leveraged capital structure with the goal of achieving a profitable
exit. Managements in buyout and venture deals share the goals and
objectives of owners.
In spite of differences between the technology orientation of traditional
venture capital and the mature business bias of the leveraged buyout arena,
discussions of private equity generally include both venture and buyout
investments. In addition to the shared characteristics of illiquidity and high
return potential, venture and buyout investing embrace a scope of activities
that share important attributes with marketable equities.
Leveraged buyouts respond to many of the same factors that influence
marketable securities. In fact, in transactions driven solely by financial
engineering, buyouts simply represent turbo-charged equity, with leverage
magnifying the results—good or bad—produced by a particular company.
For example, when Warburg Pincus took Bausch & Lomb private in a 2007
leveraged buyout transaction, the fundamental nature of the company’s
consumer products business remained the same. Bausch & Lomb continued
as the self-described “eye health company dedicated to perfecting vision
and enhancing life for consumers around the world.”12 Corporate valuation
continued to respond to changes in consumer demand, commodity prices,
production efficiency, and regulatory activity. The underlying similarity
between the publicly traded Bausch & Lomb and the privately held Bausch
& Lomb suggests that investors should expect high levels of correlation
between marketable securities and leveraged buyouts.
Although early stage venture capital lacks strong links with marketable
equities, later stage venture investing depends significantly on the stock
market. Later stage venture investments provide capital for companies
ready to go public or to be sold, buying the company time to wait for a
ready public market or an attractive corporate suitor. Market action
influences the price at which later stage venture investors enter an
investment and plays an even more critical role in the price at which
investors exit successful positions.
Even early stage valuations respond somewhat to equity market
conditions. When entrepreneurs start companies in an industry favored by


=== PAGE 265 ===
the equity markets, venture capitalists pay premium prices to participate.
Conversely, less highly desired enterprises command lower entry
valuations, providing investors with relatively attractive starting points. As
companies mature, equity market conditions increasingly influence venture
capital valuations.
In their most basic form, venture and buyout investing represent a
riskier means of obtaining equity exposure. The high leverage inherent in
buyout transactions and the corporate immaturity intrinsic to venture
investments cause investors to experience greater fundamental risk and to
expect materially higher investment returns.
Strangely, historical results generally fail to reflect the hoped-for
enhanced returns, while both correlation measures and risk levels fall below
expectations. Unfortunately, poor returns for private investing probably
reflect reality while the lower-than-expected correlation and lower-than-
expected risk constitute a statistical artifact. Illiquidity masks the
relationship between fundamental drivers of company value and changes in
market price, causing private equity’s diversifying power to appear
artificially high. If two otherwise identical companies differ only in the
form of organization—one private, the other public—the infrequently and
less aggressively valued private company appears much more stable than
the frequently valued publicly traded company, particularly in a world
where securities markets exhibit excess volatility. Even though both
companies react in identical fashion to fundamental drivers of corporate
value, the less volatile private entity boasts superior risk characteristics,
based solely on mis-measurement of the company’s true underlying
volatility. Not only does lack of day-to-day valuation information reduce
reported risk levels, the private company gains spurious diversifying
characteristics based solely on lack of co-movement with the more
frequently valued public company.
While a fair portion of the observed “diversification” provided by
private equity stems from the infrequent valuations accorded illiquid assets,
some lack of correlation between marketable and private assets results from
value-added strategies pursued by private firms. Consider the case of an
idea, a garage and an entrepreneur financed with venture capital. As the
company develops its product, initiates sales and becomes profitable, value
creation takes place independent of the action on the floor of the stock


=== PAGE 266 ===
exchange. Because results from company building activities loom large
relative to results from the original corporate base, venture investments
provide diversification relative to traditional marketable securities.
Similar value-added possibilities exist in the leveraged buyout arena,
allowing adept private investors to enhance returns by achieving operating
improvements in portfolio companies. Because buyout transactions
generally involve companies with a reasonably substantial corporate base,
market influences play the primary role in valuation, with firm-specific
value-added opportunities playing a secondary role. Even though when
compared to venture capital investments the more mature buyout companies
offer less dramatic opportunities for business growth, value-added strategies
contain the potential to offer a source of uncorrelated returns.
Pure financial engineering holds little interest for serious private equity
investors, since providing financing represents a commodity-like activity
with low barriers to entry. In the leveraged buyout business, simply adding
leverage to a company increases expected returns and boosts risk levels,
doing nothing to promote the goal of achieving risk-adjusted returns. In the
venture capital arena, later stage investors supply little more than cash,
hoping to benefit from the work of early stage investors and the prospect of
achieving rapid liquidity through an initial public offering or sale. Private
investors offering only capital operate in an extremely competitive market
with reasonably efficient pricing mechanisms and little opportunity to
demonstrate an investment edge.
Private equity opportunities become compelling only when managers
pursue well-considered value-added strategies. By seeking to improve
corporate operations in the context of an appropriate financial structure,
investors increase the scope of return-generating activity, allowing
realization of superior results less dependent on the whims of the market.
Leveraged Buyouts
Leveraged buyout transactions involve private ownership of mature
corporate entities with greater-than-usual levels of debt on their balance
sheets. The high levels of leverage produce a correspondingly high degree
of variability in outcomes, both good and bad. Leveraged buyout


=== PAGE 267 ===
investments, in the absence of value-adding activities by the transaction
sponsor, simply increase the risk profile of the company.
The increase in risk generally comes at a high price. Buyout
partnerships charge substantial management fees (often ranging between
1.5 percent and 2.5 percent of committed funds), a significant profits
interest (usually 20 percent), and a variety of transactions and monitoring
fees. The general partners of many buyout funds suggest that they engage in
more than simple financial engineering, arguing that they bring special
value-creation skills to the table. While the value added by operationally
oriented buyout partnerships may, in certain instances, overcome the burden
imposed by the typical buyout fund’s generous fee structure, in aggregate
buyout investments fail to match public market alternatives. After adjusting
for the higher level of risk and the greater degree of illiquidity in buyout
transactions, publicly traded equity securities gain a clear advantage.
Performance and Buyout Funds
In the private equity world, active management success goes hand-in-glove
with investment success. In asset classes such as domestic equity and fixed
income, which contain passive investment alternatives, investors can buy
the market. By owning a marketable security index fund, investors reap
market returns in a cost-efficient, reliable manner. In the inefficient private
equity world, investors cannot buy the market, as no investable index exists.
Even if a leveraged buyout index existed, based on past performance,
index-like results would fail to satisfy investor desires for superior risk-
adjusted returns. In fact, only top-quar-tile or top-decile funds produce
returns sufficient to compensate for private equity’s greater illiquidity and
higher risk. In the absence of truly superior fund selection skills (or
extraordinary luck), investors should stay far, far away from private equity
investments.
Consider two decades of buyout partnership returns. For funds formed
beginning in 1985, limited partners received a disappointing 7.3 percent
median return. In contrast, the S&P 500 delivered 11.9 percent returns. First
quartile buyout results reach double digits with a 16.1 percent per annum
result, while third quartile performance falls into negative territory at -1.4
percent per annum. The median buyout result compares unfavorably to the


=== PAGE 268 ===
marketable security alternative which produced higher returns with less
risk.13
Academic research backs up the notion that private equity produces
generally mediocre results. Steven Kaplan of the University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business and Antoinette Schoar of the Sloan School of
Management at MIT, in an August 2005 study on private equity
performance, conclude that “LBO fund returns net of fees are slightly less
than those of the S&P 500.”14 The study covers the period from 1980 to
2001. Kaplan and Schoar’s results should dismay prospective private equity
investors. Because the authors make no adjustment for leverage, the failure
of LBO funds to match stock market returns adds the insult of higher risk to
the injury of poor performance.
Investors in buyout partnerships received miserable risk-adjusted
returns over the past two decades. Since the only material differences
between privately owned buyouts and publicly traded companies lie in the
nature of ownership (private vs. public) and character of capital structure
(highly leveraged vs. less highly leveraged), comparing buyout returns to
public market returns makes sense as a starting point. But, because the
riskier, more-leveraged buyout positions ought to generate higher returns,
sensible investors recoil at the buyout industry’s deficit relative to public
market alternatives. On a risk-adjusted basis, marketable equities win in a
landslide.
A Yale Investments Office study provides insight into the additional
return required to compensate for the risk in leveraged buyout transactions.
Examination of 542 buyout deals initiated and concluded between 1987 and
1998 showed gross returns of 48 percent per annum, significantly above the
17 percent return that would have resulted from comparably timed and
comparably sized investments in the S&P 500. On the surface, buyouts beat
stocks by a wide margin. Adjustment for management fees and general
partners’ profit participation bring the estimated buyout result to 36 percent
per year, still comfortably ahead of the marketable security alternative. Note
the extreme positive bias of the buyout sample. Long-term studies show
that median buyout returns fall in the neighborhood of those produced by
the S&P 500. In the sample of deals presented to Yale, buyouts crush
marketable securities.*


=== PAGE 269 ===
Because buyout transactions by their very nature involve higher-than-
market levels of leverage, the basic buyout-fund-to-marketable-security
comparison fails the apples-to-apples standard. To produce a risk-neutral
comparison, consider the impact of applying leverage to public market
investments. Comparably timed, comparably sized, and comparably
leveraged investments in the S&P 500 produced an astonishing 86 percent
annual return. The risk-adjusted marketable security result exceeded the
buyout result of 36 percent per year by an astounding 50 percentage points
per year.
Some part of the failure of buyout managers to produce attractive risk-
adjusted returns stems from an inappropriate fee structure. Buyout investors
generally pay 20 percent of profits to the investment firm’s partners.
Because the incentive compensation fails to consider the investor’s cost of
capital, buyout partnerships capture 20 percent of returns generated by the
favorable wind at the long-term equity investor’s back. Of course, in the
case of transactions that employ greater-than-market levels of leverage, the
investor’s cost of capital increases along with the degree of leverage. Pure
financial engineering represents a commodity, easily available to
marketable securities investors through margin accounts and futures
markets. Buyout managers deserve scant incremental compensation for
adding debt to corporate balance sheets. By paying buyout partnership
sponsors 20 percent of all gains, the fund investors compensate the fund
managers with a significant portion of leveraged market gains over which
the fund manager exercises no control and for which the fund managers
deserves no credit. The large majority of buyout funds fail to add sufficient
value to overcome a grossly unreasonable fee structure.
Another part of the industry-wide problem of poor returns relates to
misalignment of incentives in large funds. Buyout firms generally begin
with modest amounts of assets under management, totaling in the hundreds
of millions of dollars. Management fees cover overhead and incentive fees
reward superior performance. Successful buyout funds almost invariably
increase fund size, for example, moving from $250 million for Fund I to
$500 million for Fund II to $1 billion for Fund III to $2 billion for Fund IV
and ever more for funds of increasing numerals. As fund size increases,
management fees as a percentage of assets remain relatively constant,


=== PAGE 270 ===
resulting in a dramatic increase in the dollar value of fee income. The
change in compensation structure alters general partner motivation.
The partners of newer, smaller funds focus predominantly on generating
investment returns. Since modest levels of fees cover reasonable operating
expenses, strong investment returns define the only path to wealth. Not only
do superior returns lead to large profits interests, strong results allow the
general partners to raise subsequent, ever larger funds.
Eventually, as fund size increases, fee income becomes an increasingly
significant profit center. As fee income grows, general partner behavior
changes, focusing on protecting the firm’s franchise and maintaining the
annuity-like character of the stream of fees. Larger buyout funds pursue less
risky deals, employing lower levels of leverage. Mega funds often exploit
their franchises by expanding into other (fee-generating) lines of business,
including real estate, fixed income, and hedge fund management. The big
partnerships devote more time to cultivating and nourishing limited partner
relationships, the source of the funds (and fees). Less time remains for
investment activity. Returns suffer.
Past return data provide dramatic support for the notion that larger funds
produce inferior results. For the ten years ending December 31, 2005,
buyout funds with more than $1 billion of committed capital produced
returns of 9.3 percent per year, falling short of both the overall buyout
industry return of 9.7 percent per year and the $500 million to $1 billion
cohort return of 10.3 percent. Buyouts in the range of $250 million to $500
million performed even better, posting results of 11.4 percent per annum.15
Large size correlates with lower returns.
Academic work supports the negative relationship between size and
performance. Josh Lerner of Harvard Business School and Antoinette
Schoar of MIT’s Sloan School found “a strong relationship between fund
growth and returns—the more dramatic the increase between two funds, the
sharper the decline in return between the funds.”16 Increases in fund size
benefit the general partner at the limited partners’ expense.
Casual observers might draw the superficial conclusion that the key to
success in buyout investing involves concentrating on smaller buyout funds.
While smaller funds undoubtedly offer greater alignment of interests
between the general partners and the passive providers of funds, a policy of


=== PAGE 271 ===
simply choosing to invest in smaller funds may not lead to satisfactory
results.
First, after adjusting the returns of smaller buyout funds to account for
higher levels of risk, excess returns may disappear. Smaller buyout funds
invest in smaller companies, which necessarily carry higher levels of
operational risk. Adding greater operational risk to higher financial risk
creates a substantial risk-adjusted hurdle for the small-company-buyout
investor. Investors must receive material compensation for the heightened
risk and additional illiquidity in small company buyout investing.
Second, an investor backing smaller buyout funds solely based on
historical performance makes the mistake of investing while looking
through the rearview mirror. Superior absolute, if not risk-adjusted, returns
attract flows of capital. As market participants conclude that small buyouts
outperform large buyouts, the market responds by creating large numbers of
partnerships devoted to pursuing middle-market buyout transactions. Any
excess returns that may have existed will be threatened by the influx of new
capital and new participants. Be wary of the market’s ability to eliminate
sources of superior risk-adjusted returns.
 
Yale’s Experience Yale’s buyout portfolio returns provide a ray of hope to
investors seeking risk-adjusted excess returns. The university attempts to
invest only with firms that place central importance on enhancing the
effectiveness of corporate operations. Company building strategies permit
buyout fund managers to add value beyond the increase in returns expected
from adopting higher risk capital structures. By identifying managers that
implement operationally oriented strategies, Yale creates the possibility of
winning in a tough arena.
Consider the data in the study of buyout transactions presented to Yale
between 1987 and 1998, as shown in Table 8.1. Yale participated in 118 of
542 transactions in the sample, generating gross returns of 63 percent
relative to a risk equivalent benchmark of 41 percent. If the risk adjustment
appropriately captures the return expected from financial engineering, the
premium return earned by Yale represents value added by the fund manager.
Even though fund manager fees take an estimated 15 percentage points of


=== PAGE 272 ===
annual return, the university’s net returns of 48 percent still comfortably
exceed the risk-adjusted marketable securities bogey.
Yale’s buyout results rely far less on leverage than do the results of the
broad pool of buyout transactions. Contrast the broad pool’s nearly 70
percentage point difference between the unlevered S&P return and the risk-
adjusted benchmark with Yale’s 21 percentage point difference. Less
reliance on leverage and more attention to operations lead to superior risk-
adjusted results. By employing an approach that emphasizes operating
improvements and employs lower leverage, Yale’s buyout portfolio
manages to produce handsome absolute and risk-adjusted returns.
Table 8.1 Buyout Managers Fail to Create Excess Returns
Completed Deals, 1987–1998
Active Management
No sensible investor manages private assets passively. Even if participation
in a broadly diversified market alternative were available, investors would
face nearly certain disappointment. Burdened by staggering fees and
characterized by well above marketable equity risk levels, a broad
collection of private funds would likely produce returns far from sufficient
to compensate for the risk incurred. Investors justify the inclusion of private
equity in portfolios only by selecting top quality managers pursuing value-
added strategies with appropriate deal structures.


=== PAGE 273 ===
 
Due Diligence The character of a private equity fund’s investment
principals constitutes the single most important criterion in evaluating the
merits of an investment. Driven, intelligent, ethical individuals operating in
a cohesive partnership possess an edge likely to translate into superior
investment results. On the other end of the spectrum, individuals willing to
cut corners, operationally, intellectually, or ethically, place an investor’s
funds and reputation at risk.
The central importance of choosing strong investment partners places
enormous weight on the due diligence process. Concluding that a private
equity firm consists of credible, professionally qualified individuals in
pursuit of interesting investment opportunities serves merely as a starting
point. Before making a commitment, careful investors determine that the
fund’s principals exhibit the characteristics necessary to justify entrusting
institutional assets to their care. Because of the long-term nature of private
equity contracts, investors ultimately rely on the good faith of fund
managers to behave in the best interests of the limited partners. While
negotiating appropriate deal terms remains important, contractual
arrangements almost invariably fail to deal with all of the important issues
that ultimately arise in the general partner/limited partner relationship.
Good people can overcome bad contracts, but good contracts cannot
overcome bad people.
Comprehensive due diligence requires substantial effort. Personal and
professional references provided by prospective fund managers provide an
initial set of contacts. Because of the inevitable selection bias in a hand-
picked reference list, sensible investors seek candid, confidential
assessments from other individuals, including both business colleagues and
personal acquaintances. Over time, investors develop networks that
facilitate reference checking and increase the quality of decision making.
Careful investors make skeptical calls, actively looking for potential issues.
Going through the motions by conducting superficial checks adds nothing
to the due diligence process.
Careful investors evaluate the fund manager’s investment operation by
spending sufficient time at the firm’s offices to assess the character of the
workplace. Firms exhibit distinct personalities that influence the quality of


=== PAGE 274 ===
operations in fundamental ways, suggesting that investors favor those
groups deemed a good personality fit. Spending time in informal, social
settings further enhances the information set used to evaluate the decision
makers. Selecting individuals driven to produce superior results in a high
quality manner constitutes the central challenge of manager selection.
In spite of the enormous importance of conducting thorough due
diligence, many investors fail to devote the time and energy necessary to
make well-informed judgments. In 1999, one of the principals of a $2
billion buyout fund reported that only one investor took the time to meet the
firm’s full team before committing funds. By foregoing the opportunity to
assess the quality of an investment operation’s personnel, prospective
investors fail to execute the most important task.
 
Long-Term Commitments Private investment addresses Keynes’s notion that
the job of investment might be done better if decisions were “permanent
and indissoluble, like marriage, except by reason of death or other grave
cause…”17 While falling somewhat short of the gravity of the decision to
marry, funding a private equity firm represents a long-term commitment. In
contrast to the termination of a marketable securities manager where the
vestiges of any relationship quickly disappear, evidence from terminated
private investment funds remains on the books for years to come.
Knowledge that private investment decisions represent long-term
commitments forces sensible investors to establish high hurdles for
initiating investment relationships.
The illiquid nature of private investing allows private equity managers
to make the longer term decisions necessary to pursue successful
investment strategies. Marketable securities managers know that clients
possess little patience for performance shortfall, pulling the trigger quickly
when the numbers fail to meet expectations. As a result, stock jockeys learn
to overdiversify portfolios, holding small positions in securities selected as
much to avoid disappointment as to generate exciting returns. In contrast,
private fund managers “lock in” assets for long periods of time, with
partnership terms that often span a decade or more. While the typical
fundraising cycle of two to three years might pressure managers to shorten


=== PAGE 275 ===
investment time frames, investors frequently accept the argument that “it’s
too early to judge the most recent fund,” allowing private asset managers to
make truly long-term decisions.
In fact, when evaluating private funds, investors face little choice but to
focus on changes in corporate operations, not minute-by-minute
fluctuations in market value. By emphasizing an investment’s intrinsic
value, investors assess factors under the manager’s control, liberating
private fund managers from the frequently fickle judgments of the equity
markets and allowing pursuit of sensible investment strategies.
Strong private equity groups use the long investment horizon to pursue
strategies that add substantial value to corporate activities. Fund managers
providing only capital operate at a competitive disadvantage to groups that
improve company operations in a fundamental way. In the leveraged buyout
arena, supplying money to purchase a well-run company constitutes a
commodity, as all major investment funds boast the financial skills
necessary to complete plain vanilla transactions. Low barriers to entry allow
former investment bankers to respond to mid-career crises by abandoning
the life of an agent and embracing the glories of an investment principal,
flooding the market with capital to pursue “clean” deals. In contrast, buyout
firms that demonstrate the ability to deal with substantial operating issues
carve out a special transactional niche, creating the potential for less
competitive, proprietary deal flow. The combination of less competition for
operationally oriented transactions and potential benefits from addressing
operational issues provides a compelling investment opportunity.
 
Clayton, Dubilier & Rice and WESCO Clayton, Dubilier & Rice (CDR), a
firm with a long distinguished track record, focuses its efforts on “messy”
deals—transactions that require a high degree of intervention by the
principals. The firm implements its value-added investment strategy by
bringing individuals with operating backgrounds into the partnership. These
partners provide valuable perspective during the due diligence process,
identifying acquisition candidates that might benefit from the firm’s unusual
skills. Once CDR acquires a company, operating partners take a “hands on”
approach to improving corporate operations. One subclass of transactions


=== PAGE 276 ===
that CDR pursues involves corporate divestitures. Frequently, the divested
subsidiary lacks basic corporate organizational structure, having relied on
the parent company to provide a variety of essential business services.
Value creation results as CDR uses its combination of operational and
financial expertise to create a stand-alone company from the erstwhile
corporate division.
In February 1993, CDR principals began evaluating a spin-off of
WESCO, Westinghouse’s electrical equipment and supplies distribution
arm. Within a short time, the buyout firm identified several major business
issues: (1) transition from corporate subsidiary to a market-driven business;
(2) improvement of inventory and logistics management; and (3) reduction
of corporate overhead. More than one-half of WESCO’s 250 branches
posted losses in 1993, contributing to firm-wide red ink totaling more than
$3 million on a revenue base of $1.6 billion.
On top of material business issues, WESCO suffered from sleepy
management that let the company drift. The company required a more
aggressive team to instill a sense of corporate mission, repair damaged
morale, and improve lackluster performance.
After Westinghouse rejected CDR’s initial bid as inadequate, the firm
continued to work on the project. Operating partner Chuck Ames drove the
process, identifying a management plan and preparing to run the company,
if necessary. By February 1994, when Westinghouse came back to CDR,
Ames had identified a chief executive, Roy Haley, with the ability to create
and manage the new company.
When CDR acquired WESCO for $330 million, the company lacked
basic corporate infrastructure. Creating information technology, finance,
and internal control divisions from scratch provided the basic building
blocks necessary for corporate existence. Implementing the operating plan
crafted prior to acquisition created substantial additional value, moving the
company from losses to meaningful profits.
By 1997, when a financial buyer purchased WESCO, the firm generated
$90 million of operating income on $2.7 billion of revenue. The turnaround
in performance produced great results for CDR. The buyout firm’s original
$83 million of equity generated proceeds of $511 million, providing annual
returns of nearly 47 percent to the firm’s limited partners. The extraordinary


=== PAGE 277 ===
results stem from one measure of financial engineering and several
measures of operating improvement.
Few firms possess the skill set required to address the severe operating
problems and company building challenges found at WESCO. By
combining operational and financial skills, CDR exemplifies the potential
for unusual value creation.
Buyouts and Inflation
Because buyout valuations correlate strongly with marketable equity
valuations, buyouts tend to exhibit the poor short-term inflation hedging
characteristics typical of marketable equities. That said, since a buyout’s
more highly leveraged balance sheet contains substantial levels of fixed rate
liabilities, which lose value in an environment of unanticipated inflation,
buyouts may perform somewhat better than less levered companies in an
inflationary period.
Alignment of Interests
Investors in buyout funds benefit from structural forces that serve to align
the interests of corporate management and providers of capital. High
degrees of balance sheet leverage force company managers to manage
assets efficiently, with energies focused on generating cash flows to satisfy
debt service obligations. The lure of shareholder-unfriendly corporate
perquisites pales in comparison to the specter of default and the grail of
profit participation. Buyout transactions serve to align interests of managers
and investors.
Unfortunately, investors in buyout partnerships face the same set of
issues that confront investors in any scheme where the sponsor receives a
profits interest. Profit-sharing arrangements create options that may lead to
behavior that benefits the fund operator and disadvantages the provider of
funds. To offset the optionality of the profits interest, substantial levels of
co-investment by the sponsor of the buyout partnership create a symmetry
regarding gains and losses that goes a long way toward keeping interests
aligned.


=== PAGE 278 ===
In the ideal world, management fees cover reasonable firm overhead
while profits interests provide attractive incentive compensation. In the real
world, excessive management fees, a particularly acute problem for larger
buyout funds, drive a wedge between the interests of the general partners
and the limited partners. Deal fees, which many funds charge upon
successful consummation of a transaction, represent an egregious means by
which fund managers enrich themselves at the expense of their capital-
contributing partners. The rationale for deal fees mystifies thoughtful
investors. Since investors pay management fees to compensate the fund
managers for day-to-day work on the fund, what role do transaction fees
play? Monitoring fees represent a similarly superfluous charge. Why do
buyout firms assess a fee for monitoring investments when they already
collect a more than adequate management fee? In fact, buyout funds,
particularly large funds that produce fees of hundreds of millions of dollars,
represent an unfortunate example of misalignment of interests between fund
managers and investors.
Academic research on fees gives buyout investors pause. Using data on
terms for 144 buyout funds formed between 1992 and 2006, Andrew
Metrick and Ayako Yasuda of the University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton
School estimate that the present value of fees consumes an average of
nearly $20 of every $100 under management. Little wonder that limited
partners so often fail to achieve reasonable returns!
The researchers examine the absolute level and relative size of fixed
revenues (management fees and entry transaction fees) and variable
revenues (carried interest, monitoring fees, and exit transaction fees). The
mix between fixed revenues, which buyout mavens pocket simply for
showing up, and variable revenues, which depend on investment
performance, further discourages thoughtful investors. Fully 62 percent of
revenues come from fixed fees, leaving only 38 percent to reward
performance. In fact, a portion of fees classified as variable by Metrick and
Yasuda, namely monitoring fees and the exit transaction fee (on the amount
for the original investment), accrue to the general partner in the instance of
no investment performance, painting a dismal picture indeed.18
Market Characteristics


=== PAGE 279 ===
At December 31, 2006, the U.S. leveraged buyout industry controlled
approximately $342 billion in capital, of which approximately 57 percent
was invested in companies with the remainder committed by investors, but
undrawn. More than 360 buyout partnerships were active in the United
States at the end of 2006.19
Summary
Buyout funds constitute a poor investment for casual investors. The
underlying company investments in buyout funds differ from their public
market counterparts only in degree of balance sheet risk and liquidity. The
higher debt and lower liquidity of buyout deals demand higher
compensation in the form of superior returns to investors. Unfortunately for
private equity investors, in recent decades buyout funds delivered lower
returns than comparable marketable securities positions, even before
adjusting for risk.
Fees create a hurdle that proves extremely difficult for buyout investors
to clear. Aside from substantial year-to-year management fees, buyout
funds command a significant share of deal profits, usually equal to one-fifth
of the total. On top of the management fee and incentive compensation,
buyout managers typically charge deal fees and often charge monitoring
fees. The cornucopia of compensation ensures a feast for the buyout
manager, while the buyout investor hopes at best for a hearty serving of
leftovers.
As with other forms of investment that depend on superior active
management, sensible investors look at buyout partnerships with a high
degree of skepticism. Unless investors identify top-quartile, or even top-
decile managers, results almost certainly fail to compensate for the degree
of risk incurred.
Venture Capital
Venture capital partnerships provide financing and company building skills
to start-up operations with the goal of developing companies into
substantial, profitable enterprises. Providers of funds to venture capital
partnerships respond to multiple sources of attraction: driving an important


=== PAGE 280 ===
element of the capitalist system, savoring the glitz surrounding the celebrity
of the venture capital industry, and garnering a share of the gains generated
by entrepreneurial activity.
Part of the attraction of venture capital investing lies in the option-like
character of individual investments. Downside losses cannot exceed the
amount invested. Upside gains can multiply the original stake many fold.
The combination of limited downside and substantial upside produces an
investor-friendly, positively skewed distribution of outcomes.
Unfortunately for investors, the promise of venture capital exceeds the
reality. Over reasonably long periods of time, aggregate venture returns
more or less match marketable equity returns, indicating that providers of
capital fail to receive compensation for the substantial risks inherent in
start-up investing.
Aside from the dismal picture provided by historical experience, all but
the most longstanding investors in venture partnerships face a problem in
adverse selection. The highest quality, top-tier venture firms generally
refuse to accept new investors and ration capacity even among existing
providers of funds. Venture firms willing and able to accept money from
new sources frequently represent relatively unattractive, second-tier (or
worse) investment opportunities.
Prior to the technology bubble of the late 1990s, investors in venture
partnerships received returns inadequate to compensate for the risks
incurred. In a few glorious years, the Internet mania allowed venture
investors to share in a staggering flood of riches. Yet the bubble-induced
enthusiasm for private technology investing produced an unanticipated
problem for venture investors. Indiscriminate demand allowed the
managing partners of venture funds to increase the flow of management
fees and take a greater share of profits. After the post-bubble collapse,
venture capital partnerships maintained their newly fashioned investor-
unfriendly terms, creating an even higher hurdle for investment success.
Although investing in venture capital partnerships promises
participation in the substance and glamor of backing start-up enterprises,
investors providing capital to the venture industry receive returns
inadequate to compensate for the high degree of risk. Only if investors
generate top-quartile, or even top-decile, results do returns suffice to
compensate for the risks incurred.


=== PAGE 281 ===
The Glamorous Appeal of Venture Capital
In September 1995, Pierre Omidyar, a French-born Iranian immigrant,
started an online auction site, ostensibly to help his girlfriend sell her
collection of Pez dispensers. Even though by late 1996, the business
expanded nicely and produced solid profits, the company’s founder decided
to seek outside assistance. Two years after the humble beginnings of the
company now named eBay, Omidyar invited venture capital provider
Benchmark Capital to make an investment and join the board. The then-
recently-formed Silicon Valley venture firm made a $6.7 million investment
in Omidyar’s eBay, valuing the company at $20 million.
After Benchmark’s investment, eBay’s growth continued apace, fueled
by the engagement of a new management team headed by the impressive
Meg Whitman. The company soon proved ready for prime-time, as the
September 1998 launch of eBay’s initial public offering powered the
company’s valuation to $700 million. The IPO pricing proved fleeting, as
investor interest drove the first day’s price from the offering level of $18
per share to $47 per share, representing the “fifth-highest first-day gain in
the market’s history.”20 At the close of trading on September 23, 1998 the
market valued eBay at more than $2 billion. Benchmark’s $6.7 million
investment exploded to more than $400 million, a breathtaking sixty-fold
increase in a little more than a year.
The eBay rocket ship had barely begun its journey. In April 1999, with
the stock trading at $175 per share, the company’s market value totaled in
excess of $21 billion. Looking to lock in some of the firm’s extraordinary
gains, Benchmark Capital distributed a portion of its position to the limited
partners. With Benchmark’s $6.7 million investment worth $6.7 billion, the
investment multiple of 1,000 times qualified eBay as “the Valley’s best-
performing venture investment ever.”21
Far from a flash in the pan, eBay continued to mature, becoming a
standard-bearer among Internet companies. On July 22, 2002, boasting a
market capitalization of $15.7 billion, eBay joined the ranks of the S&P
500, taking the 104th place, just ahead of the venerable BB&T Corporation,
a North Carolina based financial services concern with a storied past that
dated to the Civil War. On the last day of trading in 2007, eBay’s valuation


=== PAGE 282 ===
stood at $45 billion, representing a 2,250 multiple of the valuation assigned
to the firm by Benchmark Capital’s original investment.
Everyone made money. Pierre Omidyar, eBay’s founder, created wealth
beyond imagination. Meg Whitman, along with the rest of eBay’s
management and employees, received a huge payday. Venture capitalists
and their financial backers posted staggering investment gains. Even public
shareholders generated significant holding period returns. Venture capital
ruled.
Although eBay stands apart, the venture capital world’s other successes,
companies such as Cisco, Genentech, Amazon.com, Starbucks, and Intel,
produced enormous gains for entrepreneurs and investors alike. Even start-
ups that ultimately failed, such as @home and Excite.com, provided
opportunities for financial backers to profit as company valuations soared to
multi-billion-dollar levels, before plummeting back to earth.
The Harsh Reality of Venture Capital Performance
Unfortunately for investors, gains from high profile venture-backed
successes prove insufficient to produce acceptable returns on an industry-
wide basis. Over long periods of time, venture investors receive no more
than market-like returns with demonstrably higher levels of risk. The
promise of venture capital fails to deliver.
Venture capital partnerships produced a surprisingly low median return
of 3.1 percent for the twenty years beginning in 1985. In contrast, the S&P
500 returned 11.9 percent per annum. Venture results exhibited a wide
dispersion, ranging from 721 percent to -100 percent, with a standard
deviation of 51.1 percent. First quartile results of 16.9 percent provided
much better than median results, while third quartile returns of -6.7 percent
significantly impaired investor capital.22
Venture capital returns proved disappointing, even when measured at
the peak of one of the greatest speculative manias. The 2001 Investment
Benchmarks Report reported that a sample of nearly 950 venture capital
funds produced a 19.6 percent rate of return for the twenty-year period
ending December 31, 2000. In absolute terms, the nearly 20 percent per
year over twenty years appears handsome indeed.


=== PAGE 283 ===
Consider, however, if instead of making venture capital investments,
investors made equivalent investments, in timing and in size, in the S&P
500. The marketable security result of 20.2 percent per annum outpaces the
composite venture capital return. Even at the point of maximum return for
venture capital, investors in plain-old-large-capitalization common stocks
enjoyed higher returns with lower risks.
Aside from the intuitive conclusion that investors in privately held start-
up companies face materially higher risk than investors in publicly traded
large-capitalization corporations, more rigorous definition of the risk
differential proves difficult. Suffice it to say that venture investors must
achieve top-quartile or top-decile results to begin to argue that they
achieved superior risk-adjusted returns.
Franchise Firms
Atop the hierarchy of venture capital partnerships stand a relatively small
number of venture firms that occupy an extraordinary position. This group
of eight or ten firms enjoys a substantial edge over less-exalted
practitioners. Top-tier venture capitalists benefit from extraordinary deal
flow, a stronger negotiating position, and superior access to capital markets.
In short, participants in the venture capital process, from the entrepreneur to
the investment banker, prefer dealing with this small set of franchise firms.
In no other area of the capital markets does the identity of the source of
funds matter in the way that it does in the venture capital world. Consider
the bond markets. Do the issuers of government or corporate debt care
about the identity of the bondholders? Consider the equity markets. Do the
managements of publicly traded companies care about the identity of the
stockholders? While in certain unusual circumstances, such as in a
contested change in corporate control, issuers of securities may care about
the identity of their holders, generally the name, rank, and serial number of
security owners prove of little interest to security issuers. Consider the real
assets markets. Do managers of office buildings, operators of oil wells, or
caretakers of timberlands care about the identity of the owners?
Overwhelmingly, the source of funds for investment purchases matters little
or nothing to the individuals responsible for managing assets.


=== PAGE 284 ===
In contrast, managers of venture-capital-backed enterprises care
enormously about the source of funds. A disproportionate share of
entrepreneurs seeking start-up financing seek out venture firms with strong
franchises, in the belief that funding from a top-tier firm increases the odds
of ultimate success. General partners of franchise venture firms constitute a
truly extraordinary group, bringing exceptional judgment and unequaled
company-building skills to the board table. Start-up firms benefit from the
franchise venture capitalists’ accumulated wisdom, well-established
connections, and hard-won investment insights. Thoughtful entrepreneurs
often willingly and knowingly accept a discounted valuation to cement a
deal with a venture capitalist of choice. The reputation of the venture capital
elite creates a virtuous circle in which investment success begets investment
success.
Academic research supports the notion of franchise firm performance
persistence in the venture capital arena. Steven Kaplan of the University of
Chicago Graduate School of Business and Antoinette Schoar of MIT’s
Sloan School of Management find substantial persistence of fund
performance, suggesting that “[g]eneral partners whose funds outperform
the industry in one fund are likely to outperform in the next and vice versa.”
The authors note that their “findings are markedly different from the results
for mutual funds, where persistence has been difficult to detect.”23 While
Kaplan and Schoar identify some persistence in buyout returns, they find “a
statistically and economically strong amount of persistence” particularly in
venture funds.24
Recent entrants to the arena of venture investing, as well as longer-term
players with run-of-the-mill portfolios, face a challenge unique to the
venture industry. All of the top-tier venture capital partnerships limit assets
under management and none of the top-tier partnerships currently accept
new investors. Consequently, outsiders remain outside, limiting the
available set of choices for new investors hoping to enter and existing
investors hoping to upgrade.
New participants in the venture market must consider the return
prospects of venture firms available for new-money investment. Obviously,
industry-wide returns suffer with the removal of the records of relatively
longstanding, relatively large, relatively high performing funds. Since the


=== PAGE 285 ===
available opportunities for the overwhelming number of investors exclude
the top-tier venture firms, return expectations require a commensurate
downward adjustment. In the context of an industry that historically
produced returns similar to marketable equity returns, even a moderate
downward adjustment spells trouble. The inability to access the venture
elite drives the final nail in the coffin of prospective venture investor
aspirations.
Venture Capital and Inflation
As with any corporate entity, the venture capital investor’s claim on the
nominal value of company assets ought to provide a positive correlation to
inflation. As with other assets that exhibit some link to marketable equity
prices, the poor short-term relationship between marketable equities and
inflation calls into question the inflation-hedging ability of venture capital.
Alignment of Interests
Venture funds share with buyout funds and hedge funds the incentive
compensation scheme that creates option-like payoffs for the general
partner. A high level of co-investment by the general partner represents a
sure way to align investor interests, creating a salutary symmetry in general
partners’ attitudes toward gains and losses. Unfortunately, in the broader
venture world, significant general partner co-investment represents the
exception, not the rule. Interestingly, however, a fair number of the venture
capital elite invest substantial amounts of personal funds side-by-side with
their limited partners.
Investment success allows fund sponsors to move the terms of trade in
the general partners’ favor. The technology bubble of the late 1990s
provides a case in point. Inspired by enormous investor demand, venture
firms raised bubble-era funds in the neighborhood of ten times the size of
funds raised only a decade earlier, moving from a typical 1990-vintage fund
size of $100 million to $150 million to a 2000-vintage fund size of $1
billion to $1.5 billion. Along with the increase in fund size came an increase
in fee income that far out-paced the growth in the size of the professional


=== PAGE 286 ===
staff. The dramatic rise in asset-based income transformed fees from an
overhead recovery mechanism to a partnership profit center.
More distressing to limited partners, venture partnerships used the huge
increase in investor interest in all things technological to extract a greater
share of fund profits. Prior to the technology mania, venture firms operated
in a well-defined hierarchy that gave most firms a 20 percent share of
profits, a handful of demonstrably superior firms a 25 percent share of
profits, and Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers—the dean of the industry—a
30 percent share of profits. Elite firms double dipped by creating larger
profits and keeping a greater share.
During the Internet bubble, greed prevailed. Seemingly limitless
demand for venture capital investments allowed the rank and file to move
their profits interest from 20 percent to 25 percent and the superior firms to
move from 25 percent to 30 percent. In an extraordinary act of selflessness
and generosity, Kleiner Perkins, which could have moved its share of
profits to 40 percent or even 50 percent, kept its profit share at 30 percent.
The general partners of Kleiner Perkins, while acutely aware of their market
power, no doubt decided to leave the firm’s profit share at 30 percent to
benefit the institutional missions of the firm’s endowment and foundation
investors.
Faced with an opportunity to skew deal terms in the general partner’s
favor, in spite of the industry’s mediocre record of adding value, venture
capitalists reacted with aplomb. In the aftermath of the bubble, a number of
firms reduced fund sizes to more rational levels, mitigating the negative
impact of excessive fees, but instances of funds reducing the profits interest
have yet to come to light. In spite of dismal post-mania venture investment
performance, the ratchet in profits interest appears to work in one direction
only.
Market Characteristics
At December 31, 2006, the U.S. venture capital industry controlled
approximately $131 billion in capital, of which approximately 62 percent
was invested in companies, with the remainder committed by investors, but
undrawn. More than 870 venture partnerships were active in the United
States at the end of 2006.25


=== PAGE 287 ===
Summary
Venture capital investments appeal to a wide range of market participants
motivated by the prospects of participating in a fundamental driver of the
capitalist system, reveling in the glamor of high profile start-up successes
and benefiting from outsized investment returns. As illustrated by the case
of eBay, venture investing sometimes produces truly breathtaking results.
Unfortunately, eBay’s corporate achievements and stock market success
stand far apart from the usual venture investment results. In aggregate,
venture investors fare about as well as their marketable equity counterparts.
After adjustment for risk, the overwhelming majority of venture capital fails
to produce acceptable risk-adjusted returns.
The new entrant to the world of private entrepreneurial finance faces an
obstacle quite apart from the barriers hampering investment success in other
asset classes. The top tier of venture partnerships, essentially closed to new
money, enjoy superior access to deals, entrepreneurs, and capital markets.
Exclusion from the venture capital elite disadvantages all but the most
longstanding, most successful limited partners.
CONCLUSION
Nontraditional asset classes provide powerful tools for investors who seek
to reduce risk by constructing well-diversified portfolios and to augment
returns by pursuing profitable active management opportunities. Absolute
return strategies and real assets holdings add diversifying power, while
private equity investments enhance portfolio return prospects.
Absolute return investments consist of event-driven and value-driven
strategies that exploit mispricings in marketable securities. By offsetting
market exposure with hedges, investors reduce systematic risk and cause
results to depend on manager skill. Event-driven positions rely on
evaluation of events associated with corporate mergers and bankruptcies,
while value-driven positions depend on identification of misvalued
securities. Because absolute return strategies generate equity-like returns
largely independent of market movements, the asset class contributes
extremely attractive return and diversification characteristics to portfolios.


=== PAGE 288 ===
Yale pioneered the use of absolute return as an asset class, first
employing it in 1990. As of June 30, 2007, inception-to-date returns
clocked in at 13.2 percent per annum, with a standard deviation of only 4.9
percent (relative to the Wilshire 5000’s 11.2 percent return and 14.0 percent
standard deviation). Absolute return fulfilled its mission of producing
uncorrelated returns, showing monthly correlations of an identical 0.02 with
both stocks and bonds.
Real assets protect investment portfolios against unanticipated increases
in inflation, with investors paying a price for real assets’ diversifying power
by accepting expected returns below those of marketable equities. Under
normal circumstances, high levels of current cash flow provide a stabilizing
influence, reducing the volatility of portfolio fluctuations. From both a risk
and a return perspective, Yale’s real assets portfolio succeeded, posting a
17.8 percent per annum return from inception in July 1978 to June 2007.
Private equity positions enhance portfolio returns at the price of
meaningfully increasing portfolio risk, while producing little in terms of
diversifying power. Investor experience over the past two decades failed to
live up to expectations, as funds generally delivered below marketable
equity returns at above marketable equity risk levels. Burdened by
extraordinary fees in the form of substantial profit-sharing arrangements,
investors face the difficult task of selecting top decile funds to realize the
promise of private investing.
Strong alignment of interests marks most private equity arrangements,
creating an appropriate set of incentives for fund managers. Significant co-
investment by partners of buyout and venture funds moves investment
decisions toward a principal orientation and away from a potentially
damaging agency perspective. Side-by-side commitment of general
partners’ dollars causes all parties to share in the gains and losses, forcing
decision makers to consider the downside—as well as the upside—of
corporate actions. The show of confidence inherent in a significant general
partner co-investment sends a strong signal to potential investors.
Strategies for adding value to corporate operations make private equity
an interesting investment activity, creating the possibility of exploiting less
competitive deal-sourcing environments and identifying operations-
enhancing opportunities. To the extent that private asset managers increase
corporate value in a substantial way, investment results exhibit


=== PAGE 289 ===
independence from the forces that drive valuation of marketable equities.
Only by adding significant increments of value do private fund managers
begin to earn the extraordinary fees associated with private equity deals.
Strong active management—at the investor level, the fund level, and the
company level—forms the basis for successful private equity programs.
By selecting high quality partnerships that pursue value-adding
strategies, Yale University achieved rates of return in excess of 30 percent
per annum on private equity investments over the thirty years from 1978 to
2007, highlighting the potential contribution to portfolio results from a
well-managed private equity program. Even after adjusting for the higher
risk inherent in venture capital and leveraged buyout participations, Yale’s
results stack up well relative to other investment alternatives.
Successful investors in nontraditional asset classes engage in active
management, seeking to identify the highest quality people to manage
investment funds. In selecting partners, due diligence efforts center on
assessing the competence and character of the individuals responsible for
portfolio decisions. Developing partnerships with extraordinary people
represents the single most important element of alternative investment
success.
OceanofPDF.com


=== PAGE 290 ===
9
Asset Class Management
Active managers compete in an extremely tough arena, since markets tend
to price assets accurately. Enormous sums of money deployed by highly
motivated investors seek to exploit perceived mispricings at a moment’s
notice. Winning at the game of active management requires great skill and,
perhaps, more than a little good fortune. Serious investors consider
carefully the certain results of low cost passive management before opting
for the uncertain returns of high cost active management.
Significant costs raise the hurdle for active strategies. Identifying a
portfolio that merely beats the market fails to define success, as managers
must build portfolios that beat the market by a sufficient margin to cover
management fees, transactions costs, and market impact. Because of the
leakage of fees and costs from the system, a staggeringly large percentage
of money invested in marketable securities falls short of producing index-
like returns. Overcoming the costs of active management presents a
formidable challenge.
In the context of an extraordinary complex, difficult investing
environment, fiduciaries tend to be surprisingly accepting of active manager
pitches. Institutions all too often pursue the glamorous, exciting (and
ultimately costly) hope of market-beating strategies at the expense of the
reliable, mundane certainty of passive management. Instead of examining
critically the factors that drove past performance, investors frequently
simply associate superior historical results with investment acumen.
Because of the nearly insurmountable hurdles in beating the market,
prudent investors approach active strategies with great skepticism.
Beginning with the presumption that markets price assets correctly places
the burden of proof on the manager who promises risk-adjusted excess
returns. Only when compelling evidence suggests that a strategy possesses


=== PAGE 291 ===
clear potential to beat the market should investors abandon the passive
alternative.
Active managers worth hiring possess personal attributes that create
reasonable expectations of superior performance. In selecting external
managers, investors must identify individuals committed to placing
institutional client goals ahead of personal self-interest. Alignment of
interests occurs most frequently in independent investment management
firms run in an entrepreneurial fashion by energetic, intelligent, ethical
professionals. Engaging investment advisors involves consequences beyond
issues of financial returns, as fiduciaries entrust both the institution’s assets
and reputation to the external management firm.
Even after identifying a promising investment management firm, the job
remains uncompleted until the investor and advisor negotiate satisfactory
deal terms. The fundamental goal in establishing contractual arrangements
consists of aligning interests to encourage investment advisory agents to
behave as institutional fiduciary principals. Slippage between what the
investor wishes and what the advisor does imposes substantial costs on
institutions, reducing the likelihood of meeting basic investment goals and
objectives.
THE GAME OF ACTIVE MANAGEMENT
The thrill of the chase clouds objectivity in assessing active management
opportunities. Playing the game provides psychic rewards, generating grist
for the mill of cocktail party conversation. Keynes likens active investment
to children’s entertainment: “For it is, so to speak, a game of Snap, of Old
Maid, of Musical Chairs—a pastime in which he is the victor who says
snap neither too soon nor too late, who passes the Old Maid to his neighbor
before the game is over, who secures a chair for himself when the music
stops. These games can be played with zest and enjoyment, though all the
players know that it is the Old Maid which is circulating, or that when the
music stops some of the players will find themselves unseated.”1
Fiduciaries must ensure that active management leads to higher expected
portfolio returns, not just higher investment manager job satisfaction.


=== PAGE 292 ===
The willingness to believe that superior performance comes from
intelligent hard work clouds clear judgment. The investment world
worships success, deifying the market seer du jour. Instead of wondering
whether a manager at the top of the performance charts made a series of
lucky picks, observers presume that good results stem from skill.
Conversely, in public perception, poor results follow from lack of ability.
Market participants rarely wonder whether high returns came from
accepting greater than market risk, or whether low returns resulted from
lower than market risk. The investment community’s lack of skepticism
regarding the source and character of superior returns causes strange
characters to be elevated to market guru status.
Joe Granville
Of all the individuals who moved markets with their predictions, Joe
Granville may be among the strangest. In the late 1970s and early 1980s,
the technical analyst made a series of “on the money” predictions.
Strikingly, on April 21, 1980 when the market fell to a two-year low of 759,
Granville issued a buy signal, anticipating a powerful rally that took the
average over 1000 within three months. In January 1981, Granville’s next
major market call, a sell signal, prompted “waves of selling,” causing
markets to decline sharply on record volume. The next day his picture
appeared on the front page of the New York Times, while Washington Post
headlines read “One Forecaster Spurs Hysteria—Markets Sink in Panic
Selling.” Granville predicted he would win the Nobel Prize, crowing that he
had “solved the 100-year enigma, calling every market top and bottom.”
Granville’s technically driven forecasts came replete with costumes and
props. His routine included dressing as Moses to deliver the Ten
Commandments of investing, dropping his trousers to read stock quotations
from his boxers, and appearing on stage in a coffin filled with ticker tape.
Such antics did nothing to diminish his following. In late 1981, markets
fell worldwide, sometimes in apparent response to Granville’s calls.
According to Rhoda Bramner of Barron’s: “while Granville strutted across
the investment stage, the market pretty much followed his bearish script.”2
Unfortunately for Granville, he missed the turn of the market in 1982.
Stubborn bearishness kept his followers out of the early stages of one of


=== PAGE 293 ===
history’s greatest bull markets. In a cruel twist of fate, Granville turned
“wildly bullish” prior to the 1987 crash. As a result, a 1992 study by
Hulbert’s Financial Digest concluded that Granville ranked last among an
undistinguished group of investment newsletter writers, down 93 percent
over the twelve-year period.
Joe Granville’s one-time prominence in the investment world provides
evidence of the investing public’s association of superior returns with
investment skill. Granville’s methodology relied on technical factors with
absolutely no predictive power. Yet he moved markets, fooling large
numbers of people into following his absurd predictions.
The Beardstown Ladies
In the early 1990s, the Beardstown Ladies captured the investing public’s
attention. Based on an impressive historical record of beating the S&P 500
by 8.5 percent per year for the ten years ending in 1993, the matrons of
Beardstown parlayed their success into a lucrative writing and lecturing
career. Their first book, The Beardstown Ladies Common-Sense Investment
Guide: How We Beat the Stock Market—And How You Can Too, sold more
than 800,000 copies. The group followed with four more books, The
Beardstown Ladies’ Pocketbook Guide to Picking Stocks; The Beardstown
Ladies’ Guide to Smart Spending for Big Savings: How to Save for a Rainy
Day Without Sacrificing Your Lifestyle; The Beardstown Ladies’ Stitch-in-
Time Guide to Growing Your Nest Egg: Step-by-Step Planning for a
Comfortable Future; and Cookin’ Up Profits on Wall Street. The
Beardstown empire, which in addition to books included lectures, videos,
and cassettes, rested on the public’s belief in the solid foundation of the
Beardstown Ladies’ extraordinary investment success.
All of the hoopla surrounding the Beardstown Ladies met with
relatively little skepticism. Assertions of superior performance provided
prima facie evidence of the efficacy of their investment approach. No
further analysis needed.
Unfortunately, the Beardstown Ladies possessed so little analytical
ability that calculating investment returns challenged their capabilities.
Because the investment club’s treasurer erred when using a computer
program, she reported a two-year return as applying to a ten-year period. In


=== PAGE 294 ===
fact, upon critical examination, the extended record of reported strong
relative performance turned out to be worse than mediocre. Figures
compiled by Price Waterhouse concluded that the Beardstown Ladies
produced returns of only 9.1 percent per annum, falling short of the S&P
500 return by 5.8 percent per year and failing to meet previously reported
results by a staggering 14.3 percent per year. In short, the investment record
merits not even a modest magazine article.
The fundamental lesson from the Beardstown Ladies’ saga relates to the
attitude investors take toward performance records. Markets price securities
efficiently enough that when presented with a superior performance record,
the initial reaction ought to be that strong performance most likely resulted
from a series of favorable draws from the distribution of potential
outcomes. Only when managers articulate a compelling, coherent
investment philosophy should fiduciaries begin to consider the active
management opportunity.
Jim Cramer
Jim Cramer deserves a prominent place in the pantheon of investment anti-
heroes. Educated at Harvard College and Harvard Law School, Cramer
squanders his extraordinary credentials and shamelessly promotes
stunningly inappropriate investment advice to an all-too-gullible audience.
Cramer made a name as an unabashed cheerleader for tech stocks
during the Internet bubble. He rationalized the purchase of absurdly valued
securities by asserting that the professionals “got it wrong” and the public is
“much, much smarter than you realize.”3 Near the peak of the market in
January 2000, Cramer articulated six “commonsensical rules” that allow the
“average individual” to “routinely beat the professionals.” Included in his
list of rules were “buy stocks of companies you like,” “buy expensive
stocks,” and “buy stocks that move in chunks.”4 Cramer’s inane rules
proved perfectly timed to inflict the maximum damage to his readers’
portfolios.
Cramer never minces words. He described the “momentum/growth
camp” as a group of investors that “would rather buy stocks that have both
earnings and technical momentum, regardless of price. In other words, it


=== PAGE 295 ===
doesn’t matter how expensive they are, as long as they execute.”5 Not
content simply to promote an irresponsible momentum strategy amid a
market bubble, Cramer took the then long-suffering value managers to task.
He registered palpable contempt for the “value/contrarian camp,”
contending that “denial is the basis of the value thesis.” He accused value
investors of exhibiting “systematic blindness to all things tech,” chiding
Warren Buffett for his “preposterous” preference for “Coke over
Microsoft.”6
In February 2000, Cramer wrote about the arrogance of value mutual
fund managers, lamenting that “[n]ot only do they have the guts to tell us
that we are wrong to own our Ciscos and our Yahoo!s, they also insist that
they are the only authority on what to buy.” Cramer asserted that value
managers holding Philip Morris “should have to answer to their dereliction
of duty” and added that “the worst are the managers who bought the Cokes
and Pepsis…” He followed with a piece of advice for mutual fund investors
in “growth-turned-value stories”: “Take control. Fire these guys.”7
Of course, Cramer’s advice missed the mark by a wide margin. In the
year following the publication of his anti-value rant, Coke gained 10
percent, Pepsi, 36 percent and Philip Morris, a stunning 171 percent.
Meanwhile, Cramer’s favorites collapsed, with Cisco down 57 percent and
Yahoo! declining by a staggering 84 percent.
If Cramer’s early 2000 preference for Cisco and Yahoo! over Philip
Morris and Coke laid waste to his adherents’ portfolios, his calls on the
grocery business destroyed even more value. In February 2000, Cramer
suggested that “the death knell for value investing may very well be
sounding right now because of technological innovation.” He asserted that
old economy grocer Albertsons was “being hit by a fundamental paradigm
shift,” which “will only get worse as Urban Fetch, Kozmo and Webvan
expand.”8 Cramer unequivocally placed his bet on Internet-era firms.
Nine months after Cramer’s prognostication, Fetch discontinued its
consumer delivery business. Even though Kozmo never executed its hoped-
for public offering (sparing Cramer’s readers an opportunity to lose
money), the firm managed to muddle through until April 2000 when it
ceased operations. Webvan, which boasted a market capitalization of more
than $5 billion at the time of Cramer’s February 2000 call, filed for


=== PAGE 296 ===
bankruptcy in July 2001. Meanwhile, Albertsons, the dinosaur doomed to
extinction, posted profits of more than $500 million on nearly $38 billion of
2001 revenues. Ultimately, on May 30, 2006 Albertsons succumbed to a
takeover by a group led by SuperValu. Scorekeepers note that from the time
of Cramer’s misguided, top-of-the-market advice to the date of merger
consummation, Albertsons returned an annualized 0.5 percent per annum,
beating the S&P 500’s 0.2 percent per annum and trouncing the NASDAQ’s
–9.1 percent per annum.
In spite of Jim Cramer’s massively misguided top-of-the-market advice,
in March 2005, CNBC gave him his own TV show, Mad Money. On Mad
Money, Cramer makes a mockery of the investment process, throwing
chairs, shoving toy bears in meat grinders, wearing sombreros, and
decapitating bobble-head dolls (made in his own likeness).9 Betwixt and
between his sophomoric antics, Cramer throws out hundreds of stock
recommendations. In fact, according to an August 2007 Barron’s article, a
database covering six months of Cramer’s picks contained an astounding
3,458 stocks. Barron’s concludes that “the credible evidence suggests that
the telestockmeister’s picks aren’t beating the market. Did you really expect
more from a call-in host who makes 7,000 stock picks a year?” To make a
dismal story worse, Cramer failed to beat the market in spite of a post-
broadcast surge of an average of 2 percent for his picks. Barron’s negative
assessment would be even more dire were transaction costs and taxes
included.
Aside from Cramer’s unsurprising inability to choose thousands of
stock market winners in any given year, he seems to have admitted to
market manipulation when he ran a hedge fund in the late 1990s. In a
December 23, 2006 interview with Wall Street Confidential, Cramer flat out
said “…a lot of times when I was short at my hedge fund…I would create a
level of activity beforehand that could drive the futures.” He further noted
that “it doesn’t take much money….” In the interview he goes on to
describe ways to manipulate the prices of individual stocks.10 According to
Barron’s, Cramer later “said he’d only been talking hypothetically.”11
Surely the Harvard-educated Cramer, who served a stint as editor in chief of
the Harvard Crimson, knows that there is nothing hypothetical in the clause


=== PAGE 297 ===
“when I was short at my hedge fund.” Does Jim Cramer need a lesson in the
subjunctive?
Joe Granville, the Beardstown Ladies, and Jim Cramer provide
compelling evidence that market participants frequently and uncritically
accept simple prominence as proof of sound underlying investment strategy.
The falls from grace suffered by Joe Granville and the Beardstown Ladies
(and perhaps a future fall from grace for Jim Cramer) should encourage
investors to adopt skeptical attitudes when evaluating active management
opportunities.
PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS
Real estate investors invoke the mantra “location, location, location.”
Sensible investors seeking to engage an active manager focus on “people,
people, people.” Nothing matters more than working with high quality
partners.
Integrity tops the list of qualifications. Aside from the fact that moral
behavior represents a fundamentally important standard for human
interaction, working with ethical advisors increases the likelihood of
investment success. Choosing external advisors of high integrity reduces
the gap between the actions of the advisors and the interests of an
institutional fund.
Inevitable differences exist between the interests of an endowment and
an outside money manager. The more profound issues might include
differences in financial goals, time horizon, tax status, and various forms of
business risk. Regardless of the structure of contractual arrangements,
external advisors tend to respond to personal incentives. Employing
individuals with high moral standards reduces the severity of conflicts of
interest, as ethical managers consider seriously the goals of the institutional
client when resolving conflicts.
Loyalty plays an important part in investment management
relationships, allowing longer term thinking to dominate decision making.
In the best of circumstances, the interdependence of institutional investors
and external advisors creates a spirit of partnership, enhancing opportunities
to create successful, lasting relationships.


=== PAGE 298 ===
Loyalty flows both ways. Investors owe external advisors the
opportunity to pursue investment activities within a reasonable time frame.
Firing a poorly performing manager simply to remove an embarrassing line
item from a quarterly investment report fails to meet the test of
reasonableness. Likewise, an investment advisor abandoning reliable
partners simply to pursue a lower cost source of capital follows a short-
sighted strategy.
Obviously, loyalty does not require permanent maintenance of the status
quo. Relationships between fiduciaries and external managers come to an
end for a variety of compelling reasons. Far too frequently, however,
investors abandon good partners for trivial reasons, imposing unnecessary
costs and needlessly disrupting portfolio management activities. Investment
advisors and institutional fund managers operating with a presumption of
loyalty enhance opportunities for long-term success.
Top-notch managers invest with a passion, working to beat the market
with a nearly obsessive focus. Many extraordinary investors spend an
enormous amount of time investigating investment opportunities, working
long after rational professionals would have concluded a job well done.
Great investors tend to have a “screw loose,” pursuing the game not for
profit, but for sport. Markets fascinate successful investors.
The best investors care about risk. Diligence and hard work take an
investment manager only so far, as even the most carefully researched
decisions ultimately face the vicissitudes of market forces. Because so
much lies beyond a portfolio manager’s control, superior investors seek to
know as much as can be known, limiting uncertainty to the irreducible
minimum. Well-researched investment ideas tend to be the least risky,
since, as Yale’s great economist Irving Fisher observed, “risk varies
inversely with knowledge.”12
Money provides an obvious motivation, bringing enormous wealth to
successful investment advisors. Yet money managers seeking to maximize
income constitute a poor group from which to choose. Profit maximizing
business plans involve unbridled asset growth and unimaginative
benchmark hugging strategies, factors at odds with investment success.
Appealing money managers limit assets under management and make
aggressive, unconventional security choices, incurring substantial risks for


=== PAGE 299 ===
their money management business with the hope of generating superior
investment returns.
Warren Buffett produced his own set of desirable money manager
characteristics in a March 2007 announcement of the search for his
successor as Berkshire Hathaway’s chief investment officer:
Picking the right person(s) will not be an easy task. It’s not hard, of
course, to find smart people, among them individuals who have
impressive investment records. But there is far more to successful
long-term investing than brains and performance that has recently
been good.
Over time, markets will do extraordinary, even bizarre, things. A
single, big mistake could wipe out a long string of successes. We
therefore need someone genetically programmed to recognize and
avoid serious risks, including those never before encountered.
Certain perils that lurk in investment strategies cannot be spotted by
use of the models commonly employed today by financial
institutions.
Temperament is also important. Independent thinking, emotional
stability, and a keen understanding of both human and institutional
behavior is vital to long-term investment success. I’ve seen a lot of
very smart people who have lacked these virtues.
Finally, we have a special problem to consider: our ability to
keep the person we hire. Being able to list Berkshire on a resume
would materially enhance the marketability of an investment
manager. We will need, therefore, to be sure we can retain our
choice, even though he or she could leave and make much more
money elsewhere.13
Even Warren Buffett worries about losing a colleague to a better economic
opportunity!
Due diligence on the principals of an investment management
organization provides critical input into the manager selection process.
Spending time with manager candidates, both in business and social
settings, allows assessment of whether the manager exhibits characteristics


=== PAGE 300 ===
of a good partner. Questioning individuals on manager-supplied reference
lists confirms or negates impressions gathered in the due diligence process.
Contacting people not included on an official reference list, including past
and present colleagues, competitors, and others, provides opportunities to
evaluate the quality of a prospective manager’s business dealings and
integrity level.
In the intensely competitive investment management arena, only a small
percentage of managers overcome the enormous burden of fees to post
market-beating records. Identifying members of the small group that will
prove to be successful requires an intense focus on personal characteristics.
Only the best of the best will succeed.
ORGANIZATIONAL CHARACTERISTICS
The right people tend to create the right organization, reinforcing the
centrality of selecting strong partners. However, finding great people, while
necessary, marks only a starting point in the search for a money manager,
for strong people in a poorly structured organization face the markets with a
significant, unnecessary handicap. In a world rich with alternatives,
compromising on structural issues makes little sense.
Attractive investment management organizations encourage decisions
directed toward creating investment returns, not toward generating fee
income. Such principal-oriented advisors tend to be small, entrepreneurial,
and independent.
Size and Client Base
Appropriate size depends on the nature of the investment opportunity. In
general, smaller tends to be better. Market size matters little when trading
highly liquid securities such as U.S. Treasury bonds and large-capitalization
domestic equities. Of course, such markets provide few opportunities to
generate excess returns. Interesting active management situations reside in
smaller, less liquid markets, requiring managers to exercise discipline in
limiting assets under management.


=== PAGE 301 ===
Constraints related to the number of clients limit rational firm growth as
severely as do constraints related to asset size. While routine
communication might be conducted through broad-based mailings or by
client service personnel, informed clients inevitably require meaningful
amounts of an investment principal’s time and energy. An investment
advisor opting for less involved, less burdensome clients makes a
potentially serious mistake. First, high quality clients occasionally provide
useful input into the investment process. Second, in the event that the firm
experiences an explicable stretch of poor performance, high quality clients
continue to support the manager’s activities. Less sophisticated clients
control unreliable money, oftentimes exhibiting pro-cyclical tendencies,
buying high, selling low, and introducing instability into the investment
management operation.
A strong client base creates advantages for both the investment advisor
and the clients themselves. If a money management firm’s client roster
contains “weak hands,” temporary poor relative performance might cause
substantial asset withdrawals. Such withdrawals harm other clients directly,
in the case of transactions costs spread among participants in commingled
funds, and indirectly, in the case of client defections leading to poor firm
morale.
In contrast, intelligently supportive clients contribute financial and
emotional support to investment managers experiencing a rough stretch of
performance. By adding assets to an underperforming manager’s account,
the client stands to profit from a future reversal of fortune, while the
manager benefits from the client’s vote of confidence.
Entrepreneurial Attitude
Small, independent firms operate on the opposite end of the spectrum from
large subsidiaries of financial services conglomerates. Appropriate firm size
and sensible ownership structures contribute to superior investment results.
The tendency of smaller, principal-oriented firms to behave in an
entrepreneurial fashion provides critical context to the investment
management process. Entrepreneurial environments emphasize people,
putting them ahead of bureaucracy and structure. By placing people first,
investment organizations increase chances for success.


=== PAGE 302 ===
In entrepreneurial organizations, individuals drive decisions, placing
great importance on selecting partners with attractive behavioral
characteristics. Great people provide the core of a strong entrepreneurial
operation, according to venture capitalist Len Baker, because they “execute
better, respond better to surprise, and attract other great people.” He
suggests that managers “be out there, be obsessive, and be bottom up.”14
Entrepreneurial capitalism rests on three driving forces: innovation,
ownership, and adaptation. Each characteristic contributes to successful
money management organizations.
Innovation
According to Schumpeter, innovators “see things which only subsequently
prove to be true.”15 By building an investment process that promotes
foresight, investment advisors lay the groundwork for success. Excess
returns stem from out-of-the-mainstream positions that subsequently
achieve recognition, often in startling surprise to ordinary market observers.
By identifying the unexpected consequence before the fact, successful
investment managers realize superior returns from exploiting superior
insights. Without creative portfolio choices, investment managers face
dismal prospects, since the old combination represents the consensus view.
Market efficiency drives returns on market-like portfolios to the average,
causing conventional portfolios with conventional ideas to produce
conventional results, a poor outcome for active investment managers.
In efforts to innovate, entrepreneurs encourage experimentation,
accepting occasional shortfalls as the price paid for potential gains.
Repeated failure precedes success in many entrepreneurial endeavors,
requiring an organizational culture that encourages experimentation and
accepts mistakes. By explicitly permitting failure, but holding down its
costs, investment organizations create an environment allowing managers to
construct truly novel, high-potential investment portfolios.
Ownership
Financial and psychic ownership leads to superior results. Strong
investment management firms reward contributions monetarily while


=== PAGE 303 ===
engaging the hearts and minds of staff members. Widely distributed
ownership enhances organizational stability, facilitating long-term thinking.
Carefully structured financial incentives elicit appropriate behavior from
investment personnel, discouraging fee-driven activity and encouraging
return-generating behavior. Psychic ownership provides a powerful
complement to financial rewards. By causing investors to “buy in” to the
process, interests of manager and client come together.
Adaptation
Adaptation involves careful selection, amplifying the strong and eliminating
the weak. In choosing a portfolio of attractive positions from a large
universe of potential opportunities, successful investors express unusual
insights ahead of the herd. Strong ideas command meaningful portions of
assets, magnifying the impact of high conviction positions, while weak
positions disappear. When circumstances change, managers reconfigure
portfolios to reflect new realities. Not only does adaptation influence the
tactics of security selection, but as markets evolve, adaptation may lead to
new investment strategies. If inefficiencies disappear in a particular niche,
the entrepreneur leaves the unattractive market and seeks new mispricings
to exploit. Both tactically and strategically, adaptation plays an important
role in money management.
 
Contrast the flexibility of entrepreneurial organizations with bureaucracies.
Bureaucratic structures deal effectively with repetitive, regular, slow-to-
change environments. Control-oriented processes emphasize structure,
subordinating the role of people. Bureaucracies employ conventional
wisdom and seek consensus, punishing failure quickly and ruthlessly. By
pursuing safety and avoiding controversy, bureaucratic structures
systematically screen out the market opportunities likely to yield superior
returns. Bureaucracies deal poorly with constantly changing market
environments and fail to address even elementary active investment
management problems.
Many bureaucratic functionaries pursue investment with “name brand”
money managers, reducing career risk by choosing widely recognized firms


=== PAGE 304 ===
blessed by an external consultant. Large, process-driven entities that
produce consistent results provide a safe haven for the timid client. Well-
respected firms develop franchises, using their good name to attract and
retain assets. In the realm of marketable investments, the franchise provides
no benefit to the portfolio management process. The value of the franchise
lies solely in the comfort level provided to clients.
Comfortable investment decisions fail to generate exciting results.
Discomfort represents a necessary, albeit not sufficient, condition of
success. Because entrepreneurial firms tend to be newer and smaller, track
records may be harder to define and interpret. Less process-driven strategies
depend heavily on individuals, reducing the fiduciary’s ability to rely on the
franchise for results. While backing an entrepreneurial group takes more
courage than serving up a “name brand” recommendation, investment
success may require backing managers without standard institutional
credentials.
Unfortunately, once-attractive investment partners sometimes mature
into unattractive bureaucracies. Schumpeter’s concept of creative
destruction takes hold, as organizations evolve from small entrepreneurial
“craft shops” to large enterprises with characteristics that undermine the
premise that supported forming the firm in the first place. As the
organization grows, mutation “…incessantly revolutionizes the economic
structure from within, incessantly destroying the old one, incessantly
creating a new one.”16 Institutional acceptability threatens the very
characteristics that made the firm interesting in the first place. As time and
size erode the entrepreneurial enthusiasm that brought initial success to the
firm, the fund manager needs to reject the old partners and seek new
partners to provide superior management capabilities. The process of
creative destruction, which Schumpeter concludes is “the essential fact
about capitalism,” poses challenges for investment management
organizations.17
Investment Guerrillas
Miles Morland, formerly general partner of Blakeney Management,
captured the essence of the strengths of an entrepreneurial investment
management organization in a letter describing why he did not proceed with


=== PAGE 305 ===
a contemplated joint venture involving a much larger financial services
conglomerate. Blakeney manages assets in Africa and the Middle East.
I am afraid we are not going to go ahead with our merger….
Blakeney is a small group of guerrillas. Our success comes from our
ability to fight and forage in places too small and too risky for
people with more to lose. That is also what makes it such an
exhilarating place to work. We are focused completely on getting
and doing business with no thought for our supply lines or on whose
territory we are trespassing. [Your firm] is a big and powerful
uniformed army. Thanks to you it has retained its entrepreneurial
spirit more than any other large American firm but that is like
saying that the parachute troops are more entrepreneurial than the
tank battalions. Big firms by their nature need disciplines and chains
of command. Their sheer size means that when they venture
overseas they build complex relationships with other powers in
other lands who speak the same language….
Guerrillas cannot be integrated into the regular army without
losing what it is that makes them effective. All the professionals at
Blakeney have previously been officers in the regular army and
have deserted to join the guerrillas. It is the thought that you
personally are a guerrilla at heart that has made us go on with the
negotiations despite the warning signs. If we ask ourselves how will
this deal help us do more and better business, and how will it make
our lives more interesting and more fun, we cannot find an answer.
Everything points in the opposite direction. This is no criticism of
[your firm] or the excellent people we have gotten to know there. It
is the reality of forming an affiliation with someone as big as you.
Even if we don’t have to put on uniforms we will have to run our
business in a way that acknowledges the rules that are imposed on
you and when we go foraging for business we will have to respect
your existing alliances. We are rustlers by nature not herders. We
want to make lightning raids in Zimbabwe and Ghana and Egypt
while your partners…are holding meetings to decide…about how


=== PAGE 306 ===
and where they are going to deploy their mighty troops. When they
arrive we hope they will find a few of the local cattle are missing.
…I hope we can continue to do things together. All this only
started because of the respect I have for you personally. I bear the
blame for not realizing sooner what the implications of the deal
were. At the end of the day, we might have been the majority
shareholder and you the minority one, but if a majority mouse lies
down with a minority elephant it is not the elephant who is going to
end up as a pancake.
By selecting investment managers with an entrepreneurial orientation,
fiduciaries improve the chances for investment success. Large,
multiproduct, process-driven firms face the daunting hurdle of overcoming
bureaucratic obstacles. Small, focused, independent firms with excellent
people provide the highest likelihood of identifying the contrarian path to
excellent investment results.
Independent Organizations
Investors increase the degree of coincidence of interests with fund
managers by choosing to work with focused, independent firms.
Particularly severe conflicts between investor goals and money manager
actions arise in “financial supermarkets”—large, bureaucratic organizations
that offer a variety of investment management options. Employees at
financial conglomerates turn over at substantially greater rates than at
independent firms. Compensation explains part of the reason. The
investment management subsidiary’s revenues flow to the financial
supermarket, which takes some as profit and returns some as salary to the
subsidiary’s principals. Successful portfolio managers employed by
supermarkets have the option of simply moving across the street, opening
up shop, and garnering 100 percent of the revenues associated with their
efforts. The profit objective of the financial supermarket creates instability
at the investment management subsidiary, opening a gap between the
interests of the firm and the client. A desire for independence explains
another part of the reason for high employee turnover. The opportunity to


=== PAGE 307 ===
operate without interference from bureaucrats intent on serving corporate
interests appeals to the best investment minds. Ill-informed, outside
intervention in the decision-making process, however well-intentioned,
creates the potential for suboptimal outcomes and provides incentive to
establish an independent firm. A final motivation comes from a sense of
ownership. Owner operators simply work harder and better than rank-and-
file employees. Small, independent, entrepreneurial organizations provide
greater coincidence of interest between firm and client.
Investment focus improves the chances of satisfying client objectives. A
narrow product line forces managers to live and die by investment results,
creating an enormous incentive to produce superior returns. In contrast, a
firm with a broad product line anticipates that hoped-for gains on winning
products more than offset inevitable losses on losing strategies, reducing the
cost of any single product failure. Even worse, in seeking steady streams of
income, financial supermarket managers fashion broadly diversified
portfolios, tracking market benchmarks closely enough to avoid termination
and too closely to achieve excellence. Investors prefer that fund managers
place all their eggs in one basket, and watch that basket with great care. By
selecting concentrated, focused managers, investors increase chances for
success.
In pursuing stable flows of revenues, financial conglomerates seek
income growth at the expense of investment performance. Investment
managers soon recognize that rewards come primarily from attracting new
cash flows, not generating superior investment returns. Since size is the
enemy of performance, asset gatherers win at their clients’ expense.
Public ownership of an investment management organization introduces
another set of issues for the firm’s clients. While the goals of a privately
held financial supermarket differ materially from the interests of the money
management clients, in the case of a publicly owned money manager the
introduction of outside shareholders further exacerbates the conflicts of
interest. The most obvious, and perhaps the most severe, problem concerns
the conflict of interest between money management clients and external
shareholders.
Fortress Investment Group


=== PAGE 308 ===
When an independent investment management firm files to go public, the
offering documents contain clues regarding the consequences for owners of
the firm, their clients, and the public shareholders-to-be. But, offering
documents frequently fail to address head-on the fundamental conflict that
arises from introducing public shareholders into the mix. In the context of a
private firm, the investment manager accepts the responsibility to provide
superior investment results to clients that entrust assets to the investment
manager’s care. In the context of a public firm, the investment manager
retains the responsibility to serve the clients’ interests and adds a
responsibility to public shareholders. The interests of the clients and the
public shareholders often conflict.
The public offering of shares in the Fortress Investment Group, a $26
billion manager of private equity partnerships, hedge funds, and publicly
traded alternative investment vehicles, highlights the issues confronting a
publicly traded firm’s clients. Take the case of dividends. The November
2006 registration statement proudly notes that “unlike many publicly traded
asset managers, we intend to pay out a significant portion…of our annual
distributable earnings in the form of quarterly dividends.”18 Substantial
dividends clearly benefit shareholders. In contrast, investors in Fortress’s
asset management products suffer from the firm’s dividend policy.
Consider the source of funds for dividend payments. The most reliable
income stream comes from the management fees that Fortress charges for
asset management services. Higher fees and increased assets under
management benefit the public shareholder. Neither higher fees nor
increased assets benefit the clients of the Fortress funds. In fact, both
factors produce lower investment returns. To add insult to injury, some
portion of the fees paid by Fortress’s clients go not to the principals making
the investment decisions, but to faceless public shareholders. The issue of
dividend payments highlights the conflict between clients and shareholders.
In an attempt to justify the public offering, the offering statement
includes a helpful section entitled “Why We Are Going Public,” that
contains the headers People, Permanence, Capital, and Currency. With
respect to “People,” Fortress suggests that publicly traded shares would
“increase our ability to provide financial incentives to our existing and
future employees.”19 The Fortress statement ignores the obvious fact that


=== PAGE 309 ===
public shareholders claim a portion of the funds that otherwise would have
been available for distribution to the firm’s investment professionals. A
public offering diminishes the size of the compensation pool, making
Fortress’s claim disingenuous at best.
Regarding “Permanence,” Fortress expects to benefit from an increase
in the proportion of capital that institutions and individuals allocate to the
firm. No evidence exists that capital providers prefer publicly traded firms
to privately held firms. In fact, if capital providers seek high risk-adjusted
returns, the fundamentals support the opposite conclusion.
As to “Capital” and “Currency”, Fortress suggests that publicly traded
shares facilitate the firm’s ability to grow, create new investment products,
and finance future strategic acquisitions. Increases in assets and numbers of
products may well benefit Fortress principals and public shareholders, but
do nothing to serve the interests of the clients of Fortress funds.
Strangely absent from the list of reasons to go public is “Greed.” Just
prior to the IPO, on December 18, 2006 the Fortress principals (five in
number) sold 15 percent of the firm to Japanese securities firm Nomura “for
approximately $888 million, all of the proceeds of which went to the
Principals.”20 Moreover, between September 30, 2006 and the
consummation of the IPO, the Fortress S-1 registration statement noted that
“we distributed $528.5 million to our principals.”21 In addition, careful
readers who make it to Chapter 4 of the offering circular note that shortly
prior to the initial public offering, the principals of Fortress entered into a
$750 million credit agreement, which provided funds for refinancing a prior
$175 million credit facility and for “investment in various existing and new
Fortress Funds, and to make a one-time $250 million distribution of capital
to our principals.”22 Finally, in a tangle of complexity that only a lawyer
could love, the registration statement describes a “tax receivable
agreement,” which might produce payments to the principals that “could be
material in amount.”23
Between the $888 million Nomura windfall, the $528.5 million of pre-
IPO distributions, and the $250 million loan distribution, the five principals
of Fortress cashed in to the tune of $1,666.5 million. Finding the three
elements of the Fortress principals’ paydays required careful reading of
pages and pages of legalistic prose in the company’s disclosure documents.


=== PAGE 310 ===
In a straightforward world, the section entitled “Why We Are Going Public”
would contain one header, “Greed,” that transparently outlined the $1.7
billion of payments to the fortunate few.
The Fortress IPO clearly benefits the senior principals of the firm and
just as clearly imposes costs on both the junior Fortress professionals and
the firm’s clients. By giving a piece of the pie to outside shareholders and
by cashing out themselves, the senior principals leave far less to
compensate their subordinates. By introducing a responsibility to serve the
interests of public shareholders, Fortress creates a conflict with their
fiduciary obligation to clients. Public offerings of money management firms
benefit the few at the expense of many.
United Asset Management
United Asset Management (UAM), a once-acquisitive conglomerate of
investment advisors, illustrates the problems with external ownership of
investment managers. At the end of 1998, with equity interests in forty-five
firms and managing in excess of $200 billion, UAM ranked among the
world’s largest owners of investment management firms. While the firm
boasted an impressive level of assets under management, UAM operated
with a fundamentally flawed strategy.
The UAM investment manager roster included a number of well-
known, highly regarded groups, including Acadian Asset Management and
Murray Johnstone Limited. While superior historical performance created
UAM manager reputations, their acquisition by UAM dimmed prospects for
future excess returns. The emphasis on asset gathering, loss of
entrepreneurial drive, and diversion of revenues to passive shareholders
created conditions that led to investment mediocrity.
Even though UAM’s 1997 annual report lists the name, address, and
investment strategy of each of the firm’s affiliated managers, no
performance data appear. Net client withdrawals of $16.0 billion in 1997,
representing 9.4 percent of assets at the beginning of the year, pointed to the
conclusion that managers produced generally unsatisfactory performance.
The few textual references to investment performance do little to confuse
the annual report’s clear message: manager rewards stem from increasing
assets under management, not from generating superior investment returns.


=== PAGE 311 ===
Board chairman Norton Reamer addresses the leakage of assets by
identifying “improving our firms’ net client cash flow [as] our top priority
in 1998….”24 The report later outlines incentive programs to reach the goal,
“which is clearly a function of improved client service and retention as well
as product development and marketing.” Where is the reference to
investment returns? The annual report indicates that new acquisitions will
“concentrate on firms with the highest growth potential,” not on firms most
likely to provide superior performance.
In spite of a roaring bull market, UAM failed to increase “net client
cash flow.” Throughout 1998, nearly $20 billion in assets left the money
management firms under UAM’s umbrella. While UAM continued to
articulate a goal of increasing assets through improved client servicing, the
firm announced several investment-oriented initiatives designed to improve
performance.
The performance improvement initiatives evidently failed, as 1999
proved no more successful than 1998. UAM’s annual report noted that
assets under management increased a scant $1.2 billion during the bull-
market year; investment gains of $22.5 billion only slightly surpassed client
outflows of $21.1 billion.*
On June 16, 2000, UAM threw in the towel, entering into an agreement
to sell the firm to Old Mutual. The Wall Street Journal noted that the
purchase price, which amounted to about 1.2 percent of assets under
management, stood at the low end of the “going rate of 1%-to-5% of
assets,” reflecting “some of the restructuring work that lies ahead.”25 Trevor
Moss, a London-based securities analyst, observed that UAM had “about
the same level of assets under management that it had about five years
ago,” a dismal showing in the context of the U.S. equity market’s nearly
threefold increase.26
UAM fizzled for a variety of reasons. External ownership of investment
firms inevitably alters the institutional culture, diminishing the
entrepreneurial spirit so critical to successful money management
organizations. When senior professionals “cash out,” the single-minded
focus on generating strong results dissipates, sapping the vitality of the
firm. After the sale of a firm, junior professionals face a less rosy future.
According to UAM disclosure documents, after a typical acquisition, only


=== PAGE 312 ===
50 percent to 70 percent of revenues remain with the investment
management firm. The diversion of resources to passive external
shareholders reduces the size of the pie available for distribution to
investment professionals, creating instability. Employees of professional
services firms with substantial outside ownership enjoy the option of
moving across the street, setting up shop and garnering a greater share of
the newly formed independent firm’s profits.
In October 2007, Old Mutual’s president and chief executive officer
Scott Powers acknowledged the challenge of external ownership, noting
that “[i]t’s taken us a while to figure out the right mix of short-term and
long-term incentives.” Five years after the UAM purchase, Old Mutual
“largely completed” the process of changing revenue sharing agreements
into profit sharing arrangements, a step that reduces incentives to gather
assets. In 2007, Powers articulated a longer term goal “to get equity into the
hands of our affiliates.” While providing equity ownership to the principals
of investment management subsidiaries moves the organizational structure
in the right direction, the ultimate sharing of equity necessarily falls short of
the 100 percent ownership characteristic of an independent investment
manager.27
Pursuit of investment excellence in the context of a conglomerate of
investment managers proves futile, as the goals of external owners fail to
coincide with the aspirations of investors. Asset gathering creates
diseconomies of scale for investors, decreasing the possibility of achieving
superior performance. The transformation of senior managers from owners
to employees creates changes in firm culture that disadvantage investors.
Finally, compensation for external shareholders impairs the money
management firm’s ability to pay portfolio managers at competitive levels,
leading to turnover among personnel and posing risks to investor assets.
Significant external ownership of asset management firms creates barriers
to investment success.
Investment Banks and Investment Management
Conflicts of interest abound in the financial world, with large, complex
organizations facing the widest range of issues. Investment banks frequently
sponsor private equity funds, using access to proprietary deal flow as a


=== PAGE 313 ===
selling point. Unfortunately, deals originated by the investment banking
network come with built-in conflicts. When a company engages an
investment bank to sell a division, alarm bells should ring when the banker
suggests that the investment bank’s private equity fund purchase the
division. Is the investment bank serving the interest of a good corporate
client by paying a rich price for the division? Or, is the investment bank
serving the interest of the private equity fund by paying a low price? Under
such circumstances, fairness opinions notwithstanding, no fair price exists.
Less subtle conflicts permeate the process. Investment banks sometimes
put themselves in untenable positions, advising companies at the same time
as they provide financing. In August 2007, Lehman Brothers found itself
horribly conflicted when its Home Depot Supply transaction floundered
amid the LBO debt crunch. As reported in the International Herald
Tribune, Lehman “advised Home Depot on the sale at the same time it was
also providing financing to the buying group. Suddenly, Lehman was
turning around and threatening to scuttle a deal it had advised one of its
most important clients to accept.”28 Ultimately, Goldman Sachs replaced
Lehman as an advisor and Lehman retraded the deal, obtaining more
lucrative terms for its financing. Advisory and financing roles always
conflict; the stresses of the LBO funding crisis brought the conflict into
high relief.
After deals close, investment banks often continue to provide financial
advisory and capital markets services to portfolio companies. In an unusual
public description of the bonanza created by captive private equity funds,
the December 14, 1990 Wall Street Journal detailed fees generated by
Morgan Stanley’s investment in Burlington Industries.
Morgan Stanley and Burlington Industries
In 1987, Morgan Stanley’s leveraged buyout fund invested $46 million of
equity in the $2.2 billion purchase of Burlington Industries. Over the next
three years, the investment bank charged the company more than $120
million in fees for services ranging from underwriting to advising on
divestitures. Because Morgan Stanley controlled the board of Burlington
Industries, decisions regarding financing and divestitures were neither arm’s
length nor exposed to market forces. At best, all transactions benefited the


=== PAGE 314 ===
company, with Morgan Stanley compensated at market rates for services
rendered. At worst, unnecessary transactions generated above-market fees,
disadvantaging the company and Morgan Stanley fund investors. When a
fund sponsor profits by charging advisory fees at the direct expense of
investors, serious conflicts of interest ensue.
Noting that “nearly every time Burlington needed advice, Morgan
Stanley turned on the meter,” Wall Street Journal reporter George Anders
suggests that “the story of Burlington Industries raises troubling questions
about Wall Street’s foray into merchant banking.”29 Fees generated by
Morgan Stanley “for everything from underwriting Burlington’s high yield
debt to overseeing a blizzard of divestitures” dwarf the equity investment
made by the partners of Morgan Stanley in the Burlington transaction,
providing handsome returns to the investment bank irrespective of the
returns delivered to the firm’s private equity investors.30
Goldman Sachs and the Water Street Corporate Recovery Fund
Goldman Sachs created an even more extensive web of conflicts when in
1990 it established the Water Street Corporate Recovery Fund, a $783
million “vulture fund” set up to make concentrated investments in
distressed securities. Hoping to be viewed as a savior of bankrupt
companies, instead Goldman stirred up a hornet’s nest of conflicts.
One set of conflicts existed between Goldman’s financial restructuring
advisory business and control investing in distressed situations. Investment
banks generally rely on “Chinese walls” to contain sensitive data supplied
by clients in the course of advisory assignments, keeping inside information
away from securities analysts and traders. The term Chinese wall may be
employed because such walls are easily removed at an assignment’s end. A
cynic (or realist) might argue that paper-thin permeability more aptly
describes Chinese walls. Because Goldman partner Mikael Salovaara both
ran the Water Street Fund and continued to advise clients on restructuring,
any shred of separation between the business disappeared, causing “traders
at other firms (to joke) that Mr. Salovaara had a ‘Chinese wall’ in the
middle of his brain.”31


=== PAGE 315 ===
The Water Street Fund investment in distressed bonds of toy-maker
Tonka illustrates several strands of the web of conflicts. After accumulating
a position in Tonka’s debt securities, Salovaara competed for an assignment
to advise Mattel on a possible acquisition of Tonka, in the process, perhaps,
picking up potentially valuable non-public information regarding the value
and salability of Tonka’s bonds. Goldman’s advantage infuriated junk bond
investors not privy to the information, causing several to complain publicly
and to suggest they would reduce activity with Goldman’s trading desk.32
Ultimately, Tonka agreed to be acquired by Hasbro, creating yet another
problem for Goldman. The Water Street Fund owned more than half of
Tonka’s bonds, having acquired the position at less than 50 percent of face
value.33 Even though Tonka’s board of directors wished to sell the company
to Hasbro, Goldman played hardball, holding out for more money for the
firm’s bond position. While such tactics raise few eyebrows in the rough
and tumble world of distressed debt, some clients saw Goldman’s actions as
inconsistent with the firm’s avowal to avoid any participation in hostile
merger activity. Ultimately, the investment bank’s tactics worked,
increasing payments received for the Tonka bond position by reducing the
value of other participants’ Tonka and Hasbro shareholdings. Goldman’s
investment returns came at great expense, tarnishing the firm’s reputation
for putting clients first.
A final strand in the conflict web relates to Goldman’s junk bond
trading activity. To avoid competition, the firm limited the high yield
trading desk’s activity in bonds that interested the Water Street Fund.
Goldman’s trading clients, already concerned about the firm’s possible
informational advantages, faced market makers less able to take positions.
Goldman’s advisory conflict troubles went beyond the Tonka case.
According to an article in the June 4, 1991 Wall Street Journal, “nine of
twenty-one companies that the Water Street Fund selected for
‘restructuring’ are or were Goldman clients.”34 Perceptions mounted that
Goldman invested the Water Street Fund with an unfair advantage.
Faced with a storm of controversy, Goldman shut down the fund in May
1991, several years ahead of schedule. Even though the Water Street Fund
generated handsome returns during its abbreviated life, the fund’s enduring
legacy may be its rich series of lessons on conflicts of interest.


=== PAGE 316 ===
Goldman Sachs and the Global Equity Opportunities Fund
In mid August 2007, Goldman Sachs faced unprecedented carnage in its
hedge fund portfolio. The firm’s flagship $7.5 billion Global Alpha Fund,
managed by Mark Carhart and Raymond Iwanowski, posted a stunning
year-to-date decline of 27 percent.35 The lower profile North American
Equity Opportunities Fund dropped 25 percent in the first seven and a half
months of the year. And, for good measure, the Global Equity Opportunities
Fund lost a stunning 30 percent of its value in the second week of August
alone.36 In aggregate, the net value of the three funds managed by Carhart
and Iwanowski declined by an impressive $4.7 billion during the first eight
months of the calendar year.
Goldman had no skin in the game. The firm’s chief financial officer
David Viniar characterized Goldman’s investments as “nothing substantial;
very immaterial, if at all.” Goldman simply collected fees for mismanaging
the hedge funds; the losses belonged to the firm’s investors. Yet, presented
with an extreme market dislocation, Goldman chose to become a principal.
In response to the dramatic price declines, Goldman Sachs arranged a
$3 billion injection into the Global Equity Opportunities Fund, of which
approximately $2 billion came from Goldman Sachs itself. On a conference
call explaining the move, David Viniar asserted the infusion of capital
benefited Goldman Sachs and “the current investors in the fund, giving
them the firepower to take advantage of the opportunities in the market
today.” In reality, Goldman used the bulk of the infusion to play defense.
The fund managers employed the cash contribution to bring the fund’s
leverage down from an irresponsible level of approximately 6 to 1 to a still
high (but more defensible) level of around 3.5 to 1.37
Goldman’s move raises a number of questions. If, indeed, the move
benefited existing clients by reducing leverage and providing firepower,
why did Goldman choose to benefit only clients of the Global Equity
Opportunities Fund? What of the fiduciary responsibility of Goldman Sachs
to clients invested in the Global Alpha Fund and the North American
Equity Opportunities Fund? Goldman Sachs’s David Viniar noted that the
fund managers were reducing risk and reducing leverage in both Global
Alpha and North American Equity Opportunities. Why should Global
Equity Opportunities receive a so-called benefit from Goldman in the form


=== PAGE 317 ===
of a cash contribution that presumably allowed low-cost deleveraging,
while the unfavored funds faced the market-related costs of selling assets in
a hostile trading environment?
The timing of Goldman’s investment raises questions about the firm’s
favored access to what senior management characterized as “a good
investment opportunity.” Instead of providing the opportunity to existing
clients of the Global Equity Opportunities Fund, Goldman took the lion’s
share for itself and reached out to a select group of investors for the rest,
ultimately raising $1 billion from the likes of Eli Broad, C.V. Starr (Maurice
“Hank” Greenberg), and Perry Capital.38 As a fiduciary for the investors in
Global Equity Opportunities Fund, should not Goldman first offer the
chance to take advantage of the fund’s opportunities to the existing
investors?
Viewed from another perspective, Goldman’s investment in Global
Equity Opportunities might actually harm the fund’s clients, in contrast to
the benefit that Goldman claims. Goldman and the firm’s favored co-
investors enjoyed the opportunity to invest $3 billion in the Global Equity
Opportunities Fund at net asset value on the day of their choosing. Goldman
got a sweet deal. Had the $3 billion been invested in the securities that
comprise the fund, the market impact of the sizable trades would no doubt
force prices up, increasing Goldman’s cost basis. Instead, by using the
contributed assets to reduce leverage, Goldman bought in at a price that
otherwise would have been impossible to achieve. Existing investors
suffered dilution of their position.
Finally, Goldman Sachs provided the cherry-picking investors better
deal terms than those accorded the existing Global Equity Opportunities
Fund investors. In an analyst conference call, Goldman Sachs president and
co-chief operating officer Gary Cohen noted that the firm’s cash infusion
put Goldman in an “equal position to all the existing investors.” In fact, the
new money pays no management fee, pays a reduced carry of 10 percent,
and benefits from a hurdle rate of 10 percent. Because Goldman and the
other favored investors received preferential terms on their investment, their
actions certainly disadvantaged the existing fund investors.
In any event, Goldman picked an opportune time to make its
commitment to the Global Equity Opportunities Fund. Bloomberg reported


=== PAGE 318 ===
that in the week following the cash infusion, the fund rose 12 percent. A
September 20th AP release noted that Goldman’s investment had
appreciated 16 percent in little more than a month. At least in the short run,
Goldman made out well. Global Equity Opportunities Fund clients shared
in the rebound, but by dint of Goldman’s investment, in an attenuated
fashion. Presented with an attractive investment opportunity, Goldman
became a principal, riding roughshod over the interests of the firm’s hedge
fund clients and enriching itself in the process.
 
While investors cannot avoid conflicts entirely, fewer differences in interest
exist when investing with independent investment management
organizations. Avoiding affiliates and subsidiaries of financial services
firms does little to reduce the rich set of investment manager alternatives.
DEAL STRUCTURE
Appropriate deal terms play an important role in producing satisfactory
investment results. After identifying an attractive investment management
firm, investors face the issue of evaluating (or negotiating) compensation
arrangements. The degree of efficiency in asset pricing determines in part
the nature of the compensation scheme, with passive management of
efficiently priced securities demanding different treatment from active
exploitation of anomalously priced assets. All aspects of investment
management fee structures contain potential for conflict between the
interests of investors and investment managers, forcing fiduciaries to pay
close attention to explicit and implicit incentives embodied in management
contracts.
Co-investment
Co-investment provides a powerful means of aligning fiduciary and fund
manager interests. To the extent that a manager becomes a principal, issues
regarding agency behavior diminish. Unfortunately, along with substantial
co-investment, issues arise regarding possible differences in goals between


=== PAGE 319 ===
mortal, taxpaying money managers and immortal, tax-exempt institutional
investors. That said, co-investment reduces the incentive for investment
advisors to profit at the expense of clients.
While any level of co-investment encourages fund managers to act like
principals, the larger the personal commitment of funds the greater the
focus on generating superior investment returns. Managers cease to benefit
from attracting new capital at the point where the return diminution on the
manager’s personal stake caused by increasing assets under management
exceeds the opportunity costs of fees foregone by limiting asset growth.
Because the easily measured level of fees foregone generally eclipses the
fuzzy estimate of size-induced performance drag, only the wealthiest
managers confront a clear trade-off favoring asset growth limitations. Even
though the numbers might favor asset-gathering strategies for most
managers, substantial levels of co-investment send strong signals to
investors regarding the principal orientation of fund managers. The idea that
a fund manager believes strongly enough in the investment product to put a
substantial personal stake in the fund suggests that the manager shares the
investor’s orientation.
Investment of personal assets side-by-side with client capital creates a
powerful alignment of interests. While profit participations focus manager
attention on the investor goal of generating handsome investment returns, a
profit sharing arrangement in which managers share only in gains creates an
option that encourages risk-seeking behavior. By making a substantial co-
investment, managers participate directly in gains and losses, leading to
more balanced assessment of investment opportunities. To realize the
hoped-for behavioral outcome, the co-investment commitment must be
large relative to the manager’s net worth, even though the amount might be
modest in absolute terms. When writing a check representing a material
portion of personal assets, the investment manager steps into the role of a
principal.
While co-investment generally improves the investor’s position by
aligning investment interests, differences in goals bear careful scrutiny.
Taxpaying fund managers in partnership with tax-exempt institutional
investors face different after-tax return scenarios. Mortal decision makers
operate with shorter time horizons than appropriate for an enduring
organization’s permanent funds. Individuals with large fund investments


=== PAGE 320 ===
frequently desire greater diversification than required by most institutions,
which hold an already well-diversified collection of assets. Even though
differences in tax status, time horizon, and risk tolerance drive wedges
between the interests of individual fund managers and the goals of
institutional investors, the benefits of substantial co-investment far
outweigh the likely costs.
Compensation Arrangements for Marketable Securities
The character of sensible compensation arrangements for investment
managers varies with the degree of efficiency in asset pricing. Passive
management of government bonds demands fee arrangements different
from those appropriate for active management of private equity. For most
asset classes investors face well-entrenched fee arrangements, ranging from
asset-based fees for relatively efficiently priced marketable securities to a
combination of asset-based fees and incentive payments for less efficiently
priced asset types. Because marketplace practices frequently deviate from
ideal compensation structures, price-taking investors generally take the
pragmatic approach of choosing the best option from a set of bad
alternatives.
Passive Strategies
Passive asset management differs fundamentally from active asset
management. Size, the enemy of active investors, works in favor of index
fund managers. For example, passive funds with large numbers of investors
and sizable pools of assets frequently offer crossing opportunities, in which
some portion of exiting investor demand for funds matches entering
investor supply of funds, allowing nearly costless exit from and entrance to
the investment pool.* Scale improves tracking of benchmarks, as large size
facilitates full replication of the investment universe, reducing the need for
tracking-error-inducing sampling procedures. Experience shows that funds
with billions of dollars track benchmarks with little or no slippage.
Barclays Global Investors, one of the world’s largest index fund
managers, offers a wide variety of products designed to mirror various
marketable security benchmarks, segregated into distinct pools for different
